Childbearing Postponement, its Option Value,
and the Biological Clock

D. de la Croix and A. Pommeret

Discussion Paper 2017-16
   Childbearing Postponement, its Option Value, and the
                     Biological Clock

                          David de la Croix1 and Aude Pommeret2

                                           October 1, 2017


                                                Abstract

           Having children is like investing in a risky project. Postponing birth is like delaying an
       irreversible investment. It has an option value, which depends on its costs and benefits,
       and in particular on the additional risks motherhood brings. We develop a parsimonious
       theory of childbearing postponement along these lines. We derive its implications for asset
       accumulation, income, optimal age at first birth, and childlessness. The structural param-
       eters are estimated by matching the predictions of the model to data from the National
       Longitudinal Survey of Youth NLSY79. The uncertainty surrounding income growth is
       shown to increase with childbearing, and this increase is stronger for more educated peo-
       ple. This effect alone can explain why the age at first birth and the childlessness rate
       both increase with education. We use the model to simulate two hypothetical policies.
       Providing free medically assisted reproduction technology does not affect the age at first
       birth much, but lowers the childlessness rate. Insuring mothers against income risk is
       powerful in lowering the age at first birth.

       JEL Classification Numbers:J13, D91
       Keywords: Childlessness, Late parenthood, Real option, Career uncertainty, Assisted re-
       production technology




   1
    IRES, Université catholique de Louvain. Email: david.delacroix@uclouvain.be.
   2
    SEE, City University of Hong Kong and IREGE Université Savoie Mont Blanc.
Email: aude.pommeret@cityu.edu.hk.
  Acknowledgements: David de la Croix acknowledges the financial support of the project ARC 15/19-063 of the
Belgian French-speaking Community. We thank Thomas Baudin, Krisztina Kis-Katos, Frank Portier, Holger
Strulik and participants to seminars at Göttingen and Southampton, and to the ARC workshop on “Family
Transformations: Incentives and Norms” (Durbuy, 2017) for comments on an earlier draft.
1    Introduction
Having a child increases risk. This is especially true as far as future income is concerned. Un-
certain career costs include the atrophy of skills due to random interruptions (Adda, Dustmann,
and Stevens 2017), a lower probability of getting promoted from temporary to permanent jobs
(Guner, Kaya, and Sanchez Marcos 2017), more frequent occupation and workplace changes
(Lundborg, Plug, and Rasmussen 2016), lost earnings opportunities with possibly lower wages,
and a possibility of discrimination (Correll, Benard, and Paik 2007). In addition, parents also
endure an increase in sickness absence (Angelov, Johansson, and Lindahl 2013). This pattern is
likely to be reinforced when children have special needs (such as visual or hearing impairment,
or mental retardation).

Beyond the issues of income and career, there is increased uncertainty affecting spending and
utility flows. Many examples can be found in the literature: childrearing reduces women’s
social network size and alters the composition of men’s networks (Munch, McPherson, and
Smith-Lovin 1997); childrearing may have long-term health consequences such as urinary in-
continence, weight gain, etc; and having a baby causes a substantial decline in the average
couple’s relationship (Doss et al. 2009). The most extreme case of risk incurred when being a
mother is of course that of maternal mortality. The consequences of this risk for fertility have
been studied in detail: exploiting variations in mortality risks across US states and cohorts,
Albanesi and Olivetti (2014) show that the growth in fertility was highest for US states and
cohorts of women that experienced the greatest reduction in maternal mortality. Albanesi and
Olivetti (2016) show that improvements in maternal health reducing maternal mortality and
morbidity are important to explain the joint evolution of married women’s participation and
fertility in the United States during the twentieth century.

Although the literature is full of examples stressing this increase in uncertainty following the
birth of a first child, it does not treat it as such (except for the maternal mortality risk). It
indeed focuses on first-order moments – such as the effect of having a child on the mean wage,
the employment rate, etc – without acknowledging the risk component. Miller (2011) finds that
delaying motherhood leads to a substantial increase in labor market earnings, of 9% per year of
delay. This benefit goes through an increase in wages of 3% and an increase in work hours of 6%.
Herr (2016) looks at the specific effect of first birth on wages. For each woman, she measures
the time in her labor market career when children are first present. For women who entered the
labor market before having children, she finds a clear monotonic relationship between delayed
first birth and higher long-run wages. Budig and England (2001) look at the effect of having
children on wages and employment. They find a wage penalty for motherhood of approximately
7 % per child. One-third of the penalty is explained by years of past job experience and seniority,

                                                2
because motherhood interrupts women’s employment, leading to breaks, more part-time work,
and fewer years of experience and seniority. The authors guess that the remaining two-thirds of
the motherhood penalty may arise from the impact of motherhood on productivity and/or from
employer discrimination. Note that all these studies are based on the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY79) which is the data set we use in our quantitative analysis as well.

In this paper, we develop a theory in which motherhood increases risk. We model the risky
nature of procreation explicitly, and stress that it is of particular importance for the optimal age
at childbearing. We focus on how to model increased risk, how to measure it in the data, and
whether it matters for household choices. The main idea we develop is that if having a child
is irreversible and affects expected future earnings through risk, waiting (postponing birth)
has a value (option value). A robust result of option theory is that the riskier an investment
project, the worthier it is to wait (Dixit and Pindyck 1994). In a different context, we also
obtain that the option value of postponing birth increases with risk. Beyond income risks, the
value of waiting interacts with fecundity (the biological clock) and the availability of assisted
procreation techniques.

Our model has some of the same innovative characteristics as Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens
(2017), namely skill atrophy, intertemporal budget constraint, and risk aversion. Apart from
the risk aspect, their model is richer than ours (they also consider occupational choices and
marital status) and needs to be solved numerically, using indirect inference and data on women
born in Germany between 1955 and 1975. Our model is more parsimonious and allows for
analytical resolution and therefore a clear grasp of the mechanisms. It can indeed be solved ex-
plicitly using stochastic optimal control and optimal control with regime switches (Boucekkine,
Pommeret, and Prieur 2013). Our theory highlights how the timing of the first birth depends
on financial uncertainty and on the risk of infertility. The model also allows to distinguish
between three types of childlessness: voluntary, natural (primary sterility), and childlessness
due to postponement.

We also conduct a quantitative analysis, identifying the structural parameters of the model
using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). This survey follows the lives of a
sample of American youth born between 1957-64 from Round 1 (1979 survey year) to Round
25 (2012 survey year). It started in 1979 with a sample of women aged 14 to 22, who were
interviewed regularly from then on. Two-thirds of the sample was still observed at the end of
the childbearing years, at which point 84 percent had children, which allows to study the effect
and timing of childbearing on wages and employment. We show that mothers face a higher
income risk than childless women. Although risk decreases with education, the risk differential
between mothers and childless women increases with the education level, which partly explains


                                                 3
why educated parents have children later.

Finally, we use the model to investigate the effect of two policies. First, introducing a hypo-
thetical insurance against motherhood-related risks appears to be a very strong tool to reduce
the age at first birth for the more educated. The empirical literature (see Gauthier (2007)
for a survey, and d’Albis, Greulich, and Ponthière (2015)) suggests that well-designed public
policy can affect the timing of fertility, including childcare provision and lump-sum financial
incentives. In unequal societies, having a well-developed market for nannies and babysitters
might play the same role (Hazan and Zoabi 2013). Second, proposing free and highly effective
medically assisted procreation does not affect the age at first birth much, but it reduces child-
lessness. Our results on assisted procreation differ from Sommer (2016) as she finds that the
introduction of IVF technology (calibrated on 2012 IVF success rates) increases the number
of births, even if it is not sufficient to compensate for the effect of an increased earning risk.
In addition, she stresses the incentive for women to further postpone motherhood when IVF
technology is available.

There exists a literature on the optimal timing of births. A first approach is deterministic and
the dynamic structure is simple, with only a choice between early and late childbearing, as
in Low (2013). In her model, women can trade one more year of job experience or training
for having babies early in life (and getting married). The interest of the static structure is to
allow to solve for equilibrium on the marriage market, and to study its properties analytically.
Pestieau and Ponthière (2014, 2015) propose a dynamic model in discrete time in which parents
can have children early or late (binary choice). Here again the simple dynamic structure allows
to provide a general equilibrium analysis. An early dynamic model of fertility can be found in
Heckman and Willis (1976). They focus on the proximate determinants of fertility. In their
approach, it is costly not to have children (cost of contraception). The other costs are not
modelled. Their model suggests that a woman’s reproductive history depends on the sequence
of contraception decisions a couple makes. The authors notice that “the optimal decision
making that they have specified requires a couple to solve a stochastic dynamic programming
problem at the beginning of each month from marriage to menopause.” Later, Cigno and
Ermisch (1989) focus on the interaction between physiological and financial considerations in
a deterministic framework. The interactions between demographics and economics are studied
by d’Albis, Augeraud Véron, and Schubert (2010) and de la Croix and Licandro (2013) in
dynamic deterministic models in which women choose the time of birth. They show how the
growth rate of the population is affected by this choice. Compared to all these approaches,
we neglect general equilibrium effects and the marriage market aspect, but we model the time
dimension more precisely, as the trade-off between fecundity and income depends crucially on
age, and is not the same at 25, 35, or 40.


                                                4
Even existing structural stochastic models do not explicitly make risk depend on motherhood.
Francesconi (2002) and Sheran (2007) account for some uncertainty, but it takes the form of
taste, technological shocks, and/or birth control shocks that are not affected by labor or fertility
decisions. For instance, Francesconi (2002) estimates the structural parameters of a finite-
horizon, discrete-choice model on a sample of married women from the National Longitudinal
Survey (NLS) of Young Women (1968-1991), and show that a short interruption of full-time
work is less harmful for the earnings profile than a part-time experience during childrearing.
Using the same data set and the same type of model, Sheran (2007) shows that a childcare
subsidy is likely to reduce women’s education level, but increase their time spent working. It
should be noted that even if these papers study the joint decision of female labor supply and
fertility using dynamic life-cycle models, their objective is not to study childbearing decisions,
but rather the consequences of children on labor-related choices in order to better predict the
effect of public policies that are likely to affect both decisions. Sommer (2016) studies the
decision to have children and accounts for earning risks, but again, childbirth does not affect
risk: mothers and childless women face the same shocks and the same asset accumulation. Note
however that due to motherhood, women may decide to spend less time at work, which in fact
reduces their sensitivity to these shocks. In this case, having children provides insurance, which
is in line with the “old age security” hypothesis (Nugent 1985) based on the idea that children
are a security asset.1 Sommer (2016) finds that having children is considered as a consumption
commitment, and her model explains half of the decrease in the number of births between 1970
and 1990 when the US labor market risk was high.2 In addition, she finds that fertility and
earnings risks amplify each other even if the infertility risk leads women to have children earlier.

Demographers have also written extensively on childbearing postponement. When they aim at
analyzing economic uncertainty, their preferred approach is to include unemployment rates as
a forcing variable in their empirical studies (Hoem 2000, Meron and Widmer 2002, and Pailhé
and Solaz 2012).

The paper is organized as follows. The theory is exposed in Section 2. The main analytical
results are provided in Section 3. The quantitative part, including calibration simulation and
policy, is in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.
  1
    However, the empirical literature favors a negative effect of uncertainty on fertility, see Hofmann and
Hohmeyer (2013) or Schneider (2015).
  2
    This is consistent with the findings in Chabé-Ferret and Gobbi (2016) on post WWII data.




                                                    5
2         Theory
Time is continuous. The woman’s life extends from time 0 to ∞. An infinite horizon is assumed
for simplicity. Completed fertility can be either zero or one child. τ denotes the date when the
woman starts trying to have children. Procreation succeeds at time τ with probability π(τ ). If
it fails, we assume for simplicity that there is no second chance (at age 30, 2/3 of conceptions
occur within one year of the procreation attempt, see Léridon (2004)). With this assumption,
all uncertainty surrounding fecundity is resolved at time τ . The probability π is decreasing in
age τ and depends on medical technology.

We denote the natural sterility rate as: π(0) = π̄. We also assume a menopause age T such
that π(T ) = 0. We assume that sterility is not affected by age for very young ages and for ages
close to menopause: π 0 (τ ) = 0 for τ ≤ 0 or τ ≥ T .

The age at first birth is denoted θ. It is given by:
                                            
                                             τ         with proba.π(τ )
                                       θ=                                                               (1)
                                             +∞ with proba.1 − π(τ )


Women derive utility from consumption flow c and from having children. c is a composite good
which includes both physical goods and leisure. Accounting for the child’s consumption by
adding a multiplicative term (larger than unity) to consumption after the child’s birth would
not alter the results significantly. The life-cycle utility when having a child at time τ is:

                                              Z∞
                                                   u(ct ) e−ρt dt + e−ρθ ω                              (2)
                                              0


where ω is the lump-sum utility of having children, and ρ is the psychological discount rate.
u(·) is an increasing and concave function of consumption ct . We focus on a woman’s program
as Lundborg, Plug, and Rasmussen (2016) have shown, using instrumental variable evidence
from IVF treatments, that the effects of having a child on her partner’s annual earnings are
small, and much smaller than those estimated for women.

To get explicit analytical solutions, we assume instantaneous CRRA utility:3

                                                                ct1−ε
                                                     u(ct ) =
                                                                1−ε
    3
        Note that a CRRA utility function features risk aversion as u00 < 0 and prudence as u000 > 0.



                                                            6
Parameter ε represents both the relative risk aversion and the inverse of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution. As in most of the literature on risk, we assume that ε > 1.

The woman starts her life with an initial wealth a0 , which is to be interpreted as including both
physical wealth and experience capital. Asset dynamics follow Ito processes:
                                     
                                      (r1 at − ct )dt                  if t ≤ θ
                             dat =                                                                            (3)
                                      (r a − c )dt + σ a dz            otherwise
                                          2    t      t         t   t


which defines the budget constraint under which intertemporal utility (2) is maximized. We
assume that wealth accumulation is deterministic until the child’s birth. Income after birth
is affected by dzt , a Wiener process (Brownian motion) with E[dzt ] = 0, var[dzt ] = t. The
uncertainty parameter σ conveys the strength with which shocks affect wealth accumulation.
The interest rates r1 and r2 denote the return on wealth for childless women and for mothers,
respectively. They include both the return on human capital and the return on physical wealth.

Having a child has a level effect, through an overall lowering4 of the mean return on assets
r2 < r1 , and a variance effect, through the inclusion of the Wiener process.5 This is consistent
with the results of Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens (2017) who show that the career cost is “a
combination of occupational choice, lost earnings due to intermittency, lost investment into
skills and atrophy of skills while out of work, and a reduction in work hours when in work.” It
is also in line with the returns to experience featured in the dynastic model of Gayle, Golan,
and Soytas (2015), according to which working less after having a child reduces future earnings
in a non-linear way since returns are not linear with the time spent working.

Each woman has an education level which may affect the deterministic part of the return on
wealth. Education may also modify the excess volatility of the return on wealth of mothers
compared to childless women. Hence, r1 , r2 and σ are different across education levels.

The woman’s problem is to choose a consumption savings plan at , ct and a date τ at which she
will start trying to have children. Her value function is given by
                                                 ∞                        
                                                  Z
                             W (a0 ) = arg max E  u(ct ) e−ρt dt + e−ρθ ω 
                                          ct ,at ,τ
                                                          0

   4
      Unless specified otherwise: the case r2 ≥ r1 will sometimes be considered later in the paper to get insights
into the mechanisms of the model.
    5
      Modeling a higher variance of shocks after some event (here birth) can be found in the macro-health
literature. For example, in Capatina, Keane, and Maruyama (2017), the variance of income increases after a
bad health shock which shifts health from a good to a bad state/regime.




                                                          7
where W expectations are taken with respect to the distribution of dzt and θ, and the woman
is subject to the budget constraint (3) and to the initial asset holding a0 .

We first provide the solution to the woman’s standard problem when she decides from the
beginning not to have children (τ = +∞). In this case, our problem is a standard textbook
problem (see e.g. Barro and Sala-I-Martin (2001), p64-67):
                              ∞       
                               Z 1−ε
                                 ct
       (ct , at ) = arg max E       dt subject to dat = (r1 at − ct )dt, and a0 given,     (4)
                                 1−ε
                             τ


and subject to the usual transversality condition. The optimal dynamics for assets is:
                                                      r1 −ρ
                                                            t
                                          at = a0 e ε           .                            (5)

and the initial consumption is given by c0 = p a0 where

                                              ρ − (1 − ε)r1
                                       p=                   .                                (6)
                                                    ε

p is the marginal propensity to consume out of initial wealth in the standard model. In this
problem, the woman has forgone the option to procreate from the beginning.

Let us now consider the more general problem in which the woman has to decide when she will
try to procreate. The problem has to be solved recursively:

 [A] Using stochastic optimal control (Turnovsky (2000)), we first consider the post-birth
     program, once the pregnancy attempt has proven successful. This delivers a utility W2 (aτ )
     at a date τ with probability π(τ ).
 [B] We also consider the case of a failed attempt to have children (this requires standard
     optimal control). This delivers a utility W1 (aτ ) at a date τ with probability 1 − π(τ ).
 [C] Finally, using optimal control with optimal regime switching (Boucekkine, Pommeret,
     and Prieur (2013)), we study the program starting from the beginning of her professional
     life, which includes the optimal choice of τ .

[A] The Post-Birth Program

The program is:                              ∞                        
                                              Z
                        W2 (aτ ) = arg max E  u(ct ) e−ρ(t−τ ) dt + ω 
                                     ct ,at
                                                  τ




                                                  8
                             subject to     dat = (r2 at − ct )dt + σ at dzt
                                           τ, aτ       given.


The program is solved in Appendix A. Consumption follows

                                              ct = qat , ∀t ≥ τ

with the propensity to consume out of wealth given by

                                           ρ − (1 − ε) r2 − 2ε σ 2
                                                                          
                                        q=                                                                  (7)
                                                     ε

Here, we need to impose ρ > (r2 − ε σ 2 /2)(1 − ε) to guarantee positive consumption. Equa-
tion (7) shows that if we had considered a log utility function, the effect of uncertainty on the
consumption/saving choice would have been ruled out. This is due to the fact that uncertainty,
as it is modeled, affects the consumption/saving choice through the certainty-equivalent6 asset
growth r2 − ε σ 2 /2.

The value function is
                                                            aτ1−ε
                                          W2 (aτ ) = q −ε         + ω.                                      (8)
                                                            1−ε
Using the results in Dixit and Pindyck (1994), p72, the mean and variance of assets are:

                                  E at = aτ e(r2 −q)(t−τ ) ,                                                (9)
                                                                                  
                                                                    σ 2 (t−τ )
                               Var at = a2τ e2(r2 −q)(t−τ ) e                    −1 ,                      (10)

and, since the percentage changes in a variable which follows a Brownian motion with drift are
normally distributed, we have

                                                 σ2              √
                                                                    
                          d ln aT ∼ N   r2 − q −      (T − τ ), σ T − τ .                                  (11)
                                                 2

This distribution pertains to an individual forecasting her assets from time τ onwards, but also
describes the distribution of wealth across individuals sharing the same parameters.
   6
    We define the certainty-equivalent X̂(t+dt) of an uncertain variable X(t+dt) as X̂(t+dt) = V −1 (Et (V (X(t+
                                                                                     1−ε
dt)))), where V (X) accounts for the attitude with respect to risk. Here, V (X) = X1−ε .




                                                       9
[B] The Program in Case of Sterility at Age τ

The program is:                                ∞                   
                                                Z
                          W1 (aτ ) = arg max E  u(ct ) e−ρ(t−τ ) dt
                                        ct ,at
                                                             τ



                              subject to           dat = (r1 at − ct )dt
                                             τ, aτ               given.

By symmetry with the previous case, consumption follows

                                                   ct = pat ,

where the propensity to consume p is the same as in the benchmark program (4). We have
p > q as ε > 1.

The value function is
                                                                 aτ1−ε
                                      W1 (aτ ) = p−ε                   .                 (12)
                                                                 1−ε
Assets are given by:
                                                                      r1 −ρ
                              at = aτ e(r1 −p)(t−τ ) = aτ e ε               (t−τ )
                                                                                     .   (13)

[C] The Full Program

The full maximization program can be written:

                                                   Zτ
                           W (a0 ) = max                u(ct )e−ρt dt + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                     {ct ,τ,at }
                                                   0




                  where ϕ(τ, aτ ) = e−ρτ [π(τ )W2 (aτ ) + (1 − π(τ ))W1 (aτ )]
                                        a1−ε                             a1−ε
                   with W2 (aτ ) = q −ε τ + ω and W1 (aτ ) = p−ε τ
                                       1−ε                               1−ε
                     subject to : ȧt = r1 at − ct and a0 given

There is no expectation operator in this program since all the uncertainty concerns what hap-
pens from date τ onwards, and expectations with respect to returns on future assets have
already been computed in the previous step, while expectations with respect to birth are fully




                                                        10
expressed using probability π(τ ).7

To solve for the optimal choice, we follow the methodology proposed by Boucekkine, Pommeret,
and Prieur (2013). We first define the following Hamiltonian:

                                   H(c, a, µ) = U (c)e−ρt + µ (r1 a − c)

One can readily write the value-function W (a0 ) in terms of the Hamiltonian H(·):

                                        Zτ
                            W (a0 ) =        (H(ct , at , µt ) − µt ȧt ) dt + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                        0


We show in Appendix B that the first-order conditions are:

                                                   ∂H(ct , at , µt )
                                                                        = 0,                               (14)
                                                         ∂ct
                                            ∂H(ct , at , µt )
                                                              + µ̇t     = 0,                               (15)
                                                   ∂at
                                                       ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                    H(cτ , aτ , µτ ) +                  = 0,                               (16)
                                                            ∂τ
                                                 ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                                              − µτ      = 0.                               (17)
                                                     ∂aτ

The first two conditions (14) and (15) are the standard Pontryagin conditions. The last two
conditions (16) and (17) may be interpreted as optimality conditions with respect to the switch-
ing time τ and the free state value aτ . The third one, Equation (16), equalizes the marginal
benefit of waiting to the marginal cost of waiting. The last one is a continuity condition: it
implies that the shadow price of the state variable at the time of the switch, µτ , is equal to the
expected marginal value of the state variable in τ (derived from the programs after the switch).

Conditions (14)-(16) are necessary but not sufficient for an interior maximum. Problems [A]
and [B] both imply convex maximization programs. Problem [C] may admit a corner solution
and the existence of an interior maximum must be checked numerically.

The time consistency of a policy {ct , τ, at } decided at time 0 would imply its optimality at
later stages t0 , t1 (but still in the pre-birth part of the problem). Rewriting the maximization
program as a decision made at time t0 leading to policy {ĉt−t0 , τ̂ − t0 , ât−t0 }, and one at time
t1 leading to {c̄t−t1 , τ̄ − t1 , āt−t1 }, one can show using conditions (14)-(17) that ĉt = c̄t , ât = āt ,
and τ̂ = τ̄ . Initial conditions at t0 and t1 are supposed consistent here with the maximization
   7
    Note that having an uncertain lump-sum utility of having children would not alter the nature of the problem,
and ω would then simply be replaced by its expectation.



                                                         11
program at time 0. This result comes from the fact that the objective function is a discounted
expected cumulative reward and discounting is exponential.

We show (see Appendix B) that conditions (14)-(17) allow to solve for the dynamics of the
asset at and of consumption ct as functions of time, and provide an implicit expression for
the optimal procreation attempt date. In particular, Equation (17) allows to find assets and
consumption at the time of the procreation attempt as a function of τ :
                                                 r1 −ρ
                                      aτ = a0 e ε τ X(τ ),                                 (18)
                                                         r1 −ρ
                                    cτ = a0 s(τ ) X(τ )e ε τ ,                             (19)

with

                                               epτ
                           X(τ ) =                           ,                             (20)
                                      1 + s(τ ) [epτ − 1] /p
                                                                    −1/ε
                            s(τ ) =    π(τ )q −ε + (1 − π(τ ))p−ε           .              (21)

s(τ ) is a CES function of the marginal propensity to consume of mothers and of voluntarily
childless (or sterile) women. X(τ ) is a factor stemming from the presence of the option to
procreate. Indeed, if π(τ ) = 0 (sterility), X(τ ) = 1. We now turn to the interpretation of the
results.


3      Interpretation and Results

3.1    Asset Accumulation

We will first look at asset accumulation. We consider four types of women: the voluntarily
childless woman (type V), the sterile woman (type S), the candidate mother (type C), and the
mother (type M).

The following proposition shows that women who intend to attempt to get pregnant accumulate
more assets to smooth consumption in the face of the drop in the certainty-equivalent asset
growth (r2 − 2ε σ 2 < r1 ).


Proposition 1 Consider s(τ ), the marginal propensity to consume the asset of a candidate
mother (type C).

     The higher the success rate π(τ ), the lower s(τ ).
     If success is certain (π(τ ) = 1), s(τ ) is the same as that of type M women.

                                                12
    If failure is certain (π(τ ) = 0), s(τ ) is the same as that of type V women (τ = +∞).

                           ∂s(τ )
Proof: From Equation (21), ∂π(τ )
                                  < 0 ⇔ ε > 1 and s(π = 1) = q, s(π = 0) = p.                         

We can now compare the assets of a woman trying to procreate aτ to those of type V women,
given by Equation (5). aτ is increased by the option to procreate as future and current con-
sumption are gross complements. Women expecting to have a child accumulate more assets
in order to face a decrease in the certainty-equivalent asset growth. This is similar to a “pre-
cautionary saving” effect except precautionary saving is usually defined as an increase in asset
accumulation in the face of uncertainty affecting the next period (see Kimball (1990)) and the
following ones. Here, uncertainty starts affecting returns τ − t periods later with, in addition,
the date τ decided by the agent herself.

Corollary 1 Before the procreation attempt, the asset growth rate of type S and M women is
the same. The asset growth rate of type V women is smaller.

Proof: The first part of the proposition is trivial as, before trying to procreate, S and M women
                                                                                         r1 −ρ
are identical. From Appendix B, the dynamics of their assets is given by aaτ0 = e ε τ X(τ ),
                                                                                               r1 −ρ
which yields a higher growth than the dynamics of the assets for type V women, aaτ0 = e ε τ ,
as X(τ ) ≥ 1 ⇔ ε ≥ 1.                                                                                


Lemma 1 After the procreation attempt, the asset growth rate of type V women is larger than
that of type M women if and only if
                                                r
                                                    8(r1 − r2 ) + σ 2
                                     2ε < 1 +                         .                             (22)
                                                          σ2

Proof: From Equation (9), the expected asset growth rate of type M women is given by:
                                                                                              r1 −ρ
E aaτt = e(r2 −q)(t−τ ) . The assets for type V women are, according to Equation (5): aaτt = e ε (t−τ ) .
The latter is larger than the former if and only if (22) holds.                                      


Lemma 2 Delaying the date τ at which the woman tries having children generates more asset
accumulation if the risk of sterility is ignored (π = 1). Accounting for the risk of sterility
(π = π(τ ) < 1 with π 0 (τ ) < 0) reduces the effect and can even reverse it.


Proof: It can be shown that: ∂X(τ
                              ∂τ
                                  )
                                    |π=1 = p − q > 0 and ∂X(τ
                                                          ∂τ
                                                              )
                                                                = p − q + Z(τ ), with

                                  epτ − 1 π 0 (τ ) −
                                                            
                                                        −
                                                               s(τ )1+ε < 0.
                                                           
                          Z(τ ) =                  q −p
                                     p        ε

                                                    13
                                                                                                 

The role of the procreation option is further highlighted by the dynamics of the assets of type
C women:                                                                  
                              r1 −ρ
                                    t
                                          r1
                                              t
                                                   r1 −ρ
                                                         t       X(τ )s(τ )
                     at = a0 e ε + a0 e ε − e ε               1+
                                                                    p
The first term represents asset accumulation in the absence of procreation option. The second
term is positive as ε > 1, again reflecting the idea that candidate mothers save more due to
their expected future loss of income.


3.2     Age at Birth

After having derived the above results concerning asset growth, we now turn our attention to
the procreation choice. The implicit expression for the optimal procreation attempt date is
obtained from Equation (16):

     cτ1−ε                                                         1−ε
                                                                        
              −ε                                                −ε aτ
                                −ρτ                 0
                                                                        + ω e−ρτ = 0. (23)
                                                           −ε
           + cτ (r1 aτ − cτ ) e     − ρϕ(τ, aτ ) + π (τ ) q − p
     1−ε                                                           1−ε

The first term represents the utility derived from the monetary gain of remaining childless a
little longer. The second term is the cost of postponing the pleasure of having children. The
last term represents the cost linked to the drop in fecundity induced by postponing (π 0 (τ ) < 0).


Proposition 2 A high enough uncertainty leads to birth postponement:

      For r2 ≥ r1 , ω > 0 and σ = 0, having a child has no cost. τ ∗ = 0 i.e. it is then optimal
       to attempt to get pregnant as soon as possible.
      For r2 = r1 , there exists a value σ > 0 such that σ > σ ⇔ τ ∗ > 0, i.e. it is optimal to
       postpone birth.
      For r2 = r1 , there exists a value σ̄ ≥ 0 such that σ > σ̄ ⇔ τ ∗ > tm


Proof: see Appendix C.1                                                                          

We can also compute the value function as:

                                (a0 s(τ )X(τ ))1−ε
                    W (a0 ) =                      (1 − e−pτ ) + ϕ(τ, aτ ) ≡ Φ(τ, a0 )
                                     (1 − ε)p

where aτ is a function of τ and a0 through Equation (18) and τ solves (23). Part of the value
comes from the possibility of trying and giving birth. The value of having this possibility, which
we call “value of giving birth” is derived by comparing the value function with and without the

                                                    14
possibility of procreating:

                               value of giving birth = W (a0 ) − W1 (a0 ),

where W1 (a0 ) is obtained from Equation (12). W (a0 ) − W1 (a0 ) gives the willingness to pay
for a child.8 This value can be decomposed into the value of immediately trying and giving
birth and the value of having the option to try and give birth later. Note that there is no
information accruing in time, meaning that this option value, which we call “option value of
giving birth” corresponds to the “pure postponement value” defined by Mensink and Requate
(2005), as opposed to the option value for receiving information or “quasi-option value”, which
is the concept developed by Arrow, Fisher, Hanemann, and Henry (see Arrow and Fisher (1974),
Henry (1974), and Fisher and Hanemann (1987)). This pure postponement value is however
part of the Dixit-Pindyck option (see Dixit (1992), Pindyck (1991), and Dixit and Pindyck
(1994)) which is the sum of the pure postponement value and of the quasi-option value. The
option value of giving birth can be derived by comparing the value of giving birth at the optimal
date and the value of an immediate attempt to become a mother:

                option value of giving birth = value of giving birth − π(0)W2 (a0 ),

where W2 (a0 ) is obtained from Equation (8).

Instead of computing the total value of postponement ( which corresponds to the option value
of giving birth), one can also compute an instantaneous value of postponement at time t, which
is obtained by computing the marginal value of postponing the birth attempt:

                                                                        ∂Φ(t, a0 )
                         marginal value of birth postponement =                    .
                                                                          ∂t

It is positive for all t lower than the optimal τ .


3.3     Childlessness

The model embeds three concepts of childlessness. When τ = +∞, the woman has never tried
to have children. This resembles demographers’ notion of voluntary childlessness, or the idea
of opportunity-driven childlessness of Baudin, de la Croix, and Gobbi (2015). When τ = 0
but θ = +∞, the woman wanted to have children at the beginning of the period considered,
but could not. This is close to demographers’ notion of involuntary childlessness, and the idea
   8
     Note that Córdoba and Ripoll (2016) refer to this value as to the “option value of having a child” in a
context where there is no timing decision, while we keep the term “option” for the additional value given by
being able to choose the date of the birth.


                                                     15
of natural sterility. When τ > 0 but θ = +∞, the woman tried at some point in time to
have children, but failed. This type of childlessness has an involuntary component, but also a
voluntary one since, by postponing birth, the woman accepted a lower probability π(τ ) of being
fertile.


Proposition 3 If ρ < r1 , there exists a unique level ω̄ of the lump-sum utility of having children
such that for ω ≤ ω̄ the optimal age to try to have children is equal to or higher than menopause
T , leading to type V women. There also exists a unique level ω̃ of the lump-sum utility of having
children such that for ω ≥ ω̃ it is optimal to try to have children immediately (at 0). These two
levels are such that ω̄ < ω̃.


Proof: See Appendix C.2                                                                                          

This proposition will allow us to calibrate the mean of parameter ω to match the observed
childlessness rate.


4       Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we address four questions. First, does the income process (3) really differ
between mothers and childless women, both in terms of growth and uncertainty? Second, can
these differences in income explain why educated women delay having their first child and why
more of them remain permanently childless? Third, what is the effect of exogenous shocks
on these choices, including the effect of a hypothetical insurance mechanism for mothers and
of free and efficient medically assisted reproduction technologies? Finally, how robust are the
results to different choices of the subjective time discount rate and the relative risk-aversion
parameter?

4.1     Identification of the Parameters

Table 1 summarizes our calibration strategy. Two parameters are set a priori. The subjective
time discount rate ρ is set at 2% on an annual basis. The coefficient of relative risk aversion
 is set to 5. As we consider a CRRA instantaneous utility function, parameter ε represents
both the relative risk aversion and the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
In general, the literature favors a relative risk aversion coefficient between 2 and 5 (see Gollier
(2001)).9 For example, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the years 1968-
1997, French (2005) estimates the coefficient of relative risk aversion for men to be in the 2.2-5.1
    9
    With ε = 5, a household owning $1M and facing a lottery that involves gaining or losing $0.5M with equal
                                                                               −4              −4               −4
probability is ready to give up $0.407M or less to avoid the lottery: (1−0.407)
                                                                          −4      = 0.5 (1+0.5)
                                                                                           −4     + 0.5 (1−0.5)
                                                                                                           −4      .


                                                        16
range (depending on the specification). The identification comes both from the saving behavior
according to which risk-averse agents save more in order to buffer themselves against the future,
and from the labor supply since more risk-averse individuals work more hours when young in
order to accumulate a buffer stock of assets for insurance against bad wage shocks when old.
While French’s estimates are about men, little has been done concerning women specifically, but
the common result from experimental studies is that women are even more risk averse than men
(Croson and Gneezy 2009). Finally, although there is no consensus concerning the value of the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution, it is largely admitted that it should be less than unity.
Our model shares similarities with a portfolio choice model which leads to very high values for
risk aversion when brought to the data (Jorion and Giovannini (1993), Kocherlakota (1996),
and Hansen et al. (2007)). Therefore, the value we have assigned to ε is a non-controversial
upper bound for the relative risk aversion which is consistent with the model we use.

                 Parameter                             value              target
 ρ      subjective time discount rate                    2%               fixed a priori
       relative risk aversion                             5              fixed a priori
                                                  0.96 exp(3.5−0.33t)
 π(t)   success rate of pregnancy attempt        0.012+exp(3.5−0.33t)     from Léridon (2005)
 r1     return on assets when childless                0.061              income growth – NLSY79
 r2     return on assets when mothers                  0.045              income growth – NLSY79
 σ2     std. dev. of Wiener process                    0.063              income range – NLSY79
 mω     mean of the distribution of ω                  1.249              mean age at 1st birth – NLSY79
 sω     std. dev. of the distribution of ω             1.011              childlessness rate – NLSY79

                      Table 1: Identification of Deep Parameters - Summary

Date 0 in the model is assumed to represent age 18 in the data. Function π(·) is a generalization
of the logistic function whose parameters are set to match the percentage of women who conceive
naturally after having started trying to get pregnant (lines b and g of Table I in Léridon (2005)).
In practice, we assume:
                                          
                                               a exp(b − ct)
                                                                        if t < T
                                          
                                          
                                 π(t) =       d + exp(b − ct)
                                          
                                           0                      if t >= T

We set T = 37 (i.e. 55 years). We set a, b, c, d to minimize

  (π(12) − 0.921)2 + (π(15) − 0.887)2 + (π(17) − 0.846)2
                        + (π(19) − 0.782)2 + (π(22) − 0.639)2 + (π(24) − 0.489)2 + (π(29) − 0.095)2

subject to π(0) = 0.96 (we impose a natural sterility rate of 4%, see Baudin, de la Croix, and

                                                      17
Gobbi (2015)). This gives a = 0.96, b = 5.53, c = 0.33, d = 0.012.

To calibrate the remaining parameters, we use data from the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), which is a longitudinal project that follows the lives of a sample
of American youth born between 1957-64. The eligible sample contains 9,964 respondents for
whom data are available from Round 1 (1979 survey year) to Round 25 (2012 survey year), about
half of them being women. We divide the sample into five education categories, depending on the
highest grade completed as of May 1994. Table 2 gives the mean age at first birth, its standard
deviation, and the percentage of women remaining permanently childless in the sample. The
age at first birth and the childlessness rate are computed from the “number of children ever
born” and “date of birth of first child” variables from XRND, which is a cross-round version of
these variables (including information from June 1969 to December 2012).

The sample includes all women who actually have some income, independently from their
marital status. An alternative is to consider married women only, which is coherent with the
model when interpreted as a unitary model of the couple. A selection bias may arise here,
because married women are not drawn randomly from the pool of women.10 Another difficulty
is that there is little evidence in the literature that the income and assets of couples is affected
by childbearing as much as those of women. In Section 4.5, we look at the robustness of the
result to this selection criterion.

Not surprisingly, we observe a positive education gradient for both the mean age at first birth
and the childlessness rate, with the age at first birth going from 18.8 to 28.7 when climbing
up the education ladder, and childlessness rates going from 7.8% to 31.3%. We do not retrieve
the result of Baudin, de la Croix, and Gobbi (2015) here, according to whom childlessness is
U-shaped in education. This is because their sample includes older women (born 1920-1945)
with very low education or none at all, and the negative part of the U is obtained for these low
education levels. We also see in Table 2 that the variability (standard deviation) in the age at
first birth is lower for the extreme categories.

To measure an individual’s income, we sum farm and business income,11 and wages and
salaries.12 Before calculating the sum, we perform two transformations: we replace NA by
0 for farm and business income if wages and salaries are known, and replace NA by 0 for wages
and salaries if farm and business income is known. Finally, we convert the income of various
  10
     The last column of Table 2 shows that the marriage rate (women who are or were married) is hump shaped
in education - as in Baudin, de la Croix, and Gobbi (2015) who provide a quantitative analysis of this pattern.
  11
     From question: How much did you receive after expenses [from your farms and businesses or professional
practices/from your businesses or professional practices]?
  12
     From question: How much did you receive from wages, salary, commissions, or tips from all (other) jobs,
before deductions for taxes or anything else?



                                                      18
 Education                        Numb. of       Mean years       Age at first birth         %           %
 category                           observ.     of education      Mean     Std. dev.     childless    married
 Less than high school (1)            551            9.26         18.84       4.02          7.80       79.85
 High school compl. (2)              1868            12.00        21.69       4.96         12.21       84.42
 Some college (3)                    1171            13.82        23.78       5.74         17.85       83.95
 College completed (4)                551            16.00        27.64       5.08         24.32       87.66
 More than college (5)                336            17.94        28.71       5.25         31.25       82.74
 All                                 4477            13.08        22.93       5.79         16.06       84.01


                 Table 2: Education Groups, Age at First Birth, and Childlessness

years into real income by dividing by the consumer price index. To bring Proposition 1 to the
data, we ideally want to capture income growth after the decision to have children has been
made. However, this is not possible, because the women in the sample are not old enough. As
an approximation, we measure the growth rate of income between ages 39 and 45. Most women
had their first child before age 39. Income at age 45 is taken as an average of income over three
years (42-44-46 or 43-45-47 depending on age in 1979) to smooth business cycle effects. In case
of missing data, the average is computed on the available one(s). Income at 39 is also taken as
an average of three years.

Figure 1 plots kernel density estimations of income growth for each education category. Solid
lines correspond to childless women and dashed lines to mothers. Compared with Table 2, we
have lost some women because income is not observable for all of them. Let us stress three
features that emerge from Figure 1. (1) For mothers, the mode of the distribution does not
depend on education and is systematically higher than that for childless women. This reflects
the fact that the income growth of mothers is systematically higher than that of childless
women.13 This is not inconsistent with r2 < r1 , as shown in Lemma 1. (2) For childless women,
the mode of the distribution moves rightwards as education increases, therefore catching up
with the mode for mothers. (3) It appears clearly that the distribution is more dispersed for
mothers than for childless women, reflecting the fact that the variance in the distribution of the
growth in income is systematically higher for mothers than for childless women.14 The latter
result is in line with our idea that motherhood increases income risk.

To reduce the sensitivity to outliers, we run quantile regressions to measure the effect of ed-
  13
     This striking results holds when restricting the sample to married women; it is thus not related to the
possible positive role of having a husband. It also holds when measuring income growth from 30 to 45.
  14
     All these results remain true when restricting the sample of childless women to singles, who are less likely
to have plans to give birth in the future.



                                                       19
                    All                                 Category (1)                             Category (2)

   10                                       10                                       10

   8                                        8                                        8

   6                                        6                                        6

   4                                        4                                        4

   2                                        2                                        2

   0                                        0                                        0

        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




               Category (3)                             Category (4)                             Category (5)

   10                                       10                                       10

   8                                        8                                        8

   6                                        6                                        6

   4                                        4                                        4

   2                                        2                                        2

   0                                        0                                        0

        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




Figure 1: Kernel Density Estimations of Income Growth Distribution by Education Category.
Childless Women (solid) and Mothers (dashed)

ucation on the distribution of income growth, and infer the parameters from those quantiles.
Table 3 presents the regression results. The independent variables include years of education,
a dummy variable indicating if the woman is or has been married, race fixed effects, and year
of birth fixed effects. The reference category is a white single woman born in 1957. The results
indicate that, for childless women, the median growth rate of income increases with educa-
tion (+0.0031∗∗∗ per additional year of education). This is not true for mothers. For both
groups, however, education helps to reduce the occurrence of bad outcomes, as can be seen
from the determinants of Q(0.07). This “protecting” effect of education is stronger for childless
women than for mothers, (0.0190∗∗∗ instead of 0.0063∗ ), reflecting the fact that having children
increases uncertainty, especially for the highly educated.

Estimators for the growth rate of income for childless women, ĝ1 , and for mothers, ĝ2 , can
be obtained using the fitted equation for the median (Q(0.50)) where the dummy “mother”
is set to 0 and to 1 respectively. For the standard error of the distributions, σ̂1 and σ̂2 , an

                                                          20
                                   Dependent variable: income growth between 39 and 45
                                      OLS               Q(0.07)               Q(0.50)               Q(0.93)
  Mothers
 Constant                          0.0691∗∗∗           −0.2204∗∗∗             0.0402∗∗             0.4654∗∗∗
                                    (0.0266)            (0.0667)              (0.0161)              (0.0554)
 years of educ.                      0.0009             0.0063∗                0.0006              −0.0054∗
                                    (0.0013)            (0.0035)              (0.0007)              (0.0031)
 Married fixed effect                 yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Race fixed effects                   yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Year of birth fixed effects          yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Observations                        2,695               2,695                  2,695                   2,695


  Childless women
 Constant                           −0.0812            −0.5676∗∗∗             −0.0025               0.1379∗∗
                                    (0.0500)            (0.0872)              (0.0450)              (0.0680)
                                            ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗                     ∗∗∗
 years of educ.                    0.0055              0.0190                0.0031                 −0.0010
                                    (0.0021)            (0.0051)              (0.0009)              (0.0041)
 Married fixed effect                 yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Race fixed effects                   yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Year of birth fixed effects          yes                  yes                   yes                     yes
 Observations                         530                 530                    530                     530
                                                                       ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
 Note:                                                                     p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

                                  Table 3: Quantile Regression



                                                                             p
Education         ĝ2      σ̂22          ĝ1             σ̂12          σ=     σ̂22 − σ̂12          r2           r1
   1         0.01837    0.01835       -0.00357         0.01645               0.044             0.074           0.038
   2         0.02011    0.01557       0.00481          0.0121                0.059             0.051           0.044
   3         0.02126    0.01385       0.01041          0.00958               0.065             0.041           0.072
   4         0.02264    0.01192       0.01708          0.00695               0.070             0.034           0.105
   5         0.02387    0.01033       0.02302          0.00496               0.073             0.032           0.135
   All       0.02079    0.01454       0.00812          0.01057               0.063             0.045           0.061

             Table 4: Moments to Match and Calibration of r1 , r2 , and σ2



                                                  21
estimator is given by taking the 7% trimmed range (the difference between the 7th and 93rd
percentiles, Q(0.93) − Q(0.07)) and dividing by 3 (corresponding to 86% of the data of a
normal distribution falling within 1.5 standard deviations of the mean). As in the model we
have assumed no uncertainty for the childless, we compute σ 2 of the model as σ̂22 − σ̂12 . Formally,
knowing that the growth rate of income is equal to the growth rate of assets in all cases, we
can rely on Equations (9), (11), and (13), and establish the following relations:

                          σ 2 = σ̂22 − σ̂12                                                     (24)
                            r1 − p = ĝ1 → r1 = εĝ1 + ρ                                        (25)
                                                                           2
                                                               ε(ε − 1)σ
                            r2 − q = ĝ2 → r2 = εĝ2 + ρ −                                      (26)
                                                                    2

Notice here that σ 2 is the variance of the growth rate of assets over time taken after one period.
It is measured with the variance across individuals, each individual being considered as one
possible realization of shocks.

The above method allows to derive r1 , r2 , and σ for the whole sample, but also specific values
for each education group. These are obtained by setting the “years of education” variable at
its group mean when computing the quantiles to be matched. Table 4 summarizes the values
of the moments to match, ĝ2 , ĝ1 , and σ̂22 − σ̂12 , and the corresponding r1 , r2 , and σ2 .

We now have to set ω and a0 . As can be seen from Equation (31), what matters is in fact ωaε−1
                                                                                           0 ,
showing that a0 acts as a scaling factor for ω. We set a0 = 100. Given the above parameters, we
can compute the two thresholds of Proposition 3. The ω̄ such that all women with ω < ω̄ are
voluntarily childless is equal to 0.04. The ω̃ such that all women with ω > ω̄ attempt to have
children at t = 0 is equal to 2.35. We now assume that ω is distributed across the population
according to
                                          ω ∼ N (mω , s2ω ).

The two parameters of the normal distribution function are set to match a mean age at first
birth equal to 22.93 and a childlessness rate of 16.06% (from Table 2). This procedure allows
to get these two levels right, but does not impose anything on the education gradient of the
two variables. In the maximization problem of the woman, we impose the additional restriction
that she cannot try to have children while at school; this requires τ > 6 + 13.08 − 18 = 1.08. It
yields mω = 1.249 and sω = 1.011. Figure 2 represents the corresponding distribution with the
two thresholds. The darker area represents the distribution of childlessness.




                                                 22
                                            ω̄                         ω̃




                                                                            N (mω , s2ω )
                                       ss
                               ss   ne
                        il dle
                     ch



                                                                                            ω


                                        Figure 2: Calibrated Distribution of ω


4.2    Overidentifying Restrictions

All the parameters of the model have now either been fixed a priori, or exactly identified with
some moments computed from the NLSY79. None of them has been set so as to match the
fact that both the age at first birth and the childlessness rate are increasing in education. We
can therefore evaluate our model against these two facts. This is in line with the spirit of
testing overidentifying restrictions, although there is no formal testing here as we do not do
any statistical inference.

For each education group, we set the income process using the corresponding parameters from
Table 4. Next, we generate an artificial population with a taste for children ω drawn from
its normal distribution. We suppose ω is drawn from the same distribution for all education
categories, otherwise is would be straightforward to match education-specific moments with
education-specific preference parameters. We impose that each woman in this population cannot
bear children while at school, and compute the optimal age for a pregnancy attempt, τ , and
the childlessness probability given by 1 − π(τ ). Finally, we average these two numbers across
women. The results are shown in Figure 3 for the five education categories. The sign of the
education gradient is correct for both the age at first birth and the childlessness rate. The size
of the gradient is underestimated for childlessness (middle panel), but less so for the age at
first birth (left panel). The model tends to overestimate the age at first birth, in particular for
education categories 3 to 5.



                                                         23
We also checked the predictions of the model for the standard deviation of the age at first
birth. The right panel of Figure 3 shows that the level of the standard error is systematically
underestimated, but its hump-shaped pattern is well reproduced. This latter result is explained
by the fact that the extreme categories of education more often hit the bounds of the set of
possible ages at pregnancy, hence lowering variability. The underestimation of the standard
deviation in the age at first birth comes from the fact that we have neglected other sources of
variability, for instance when we assume that a birth, if any, immediately follows the pregnancy
attempt.




 Figure 3: Overidentifying Restrictions: Education Gradient - data:solid, simulated: dashed

Figure 3 illustrates the new mechanism we have put forward in this paper. Motherhood increases
income volatility (Proposition 2), in particular for highly educated women. This is why they
prefer to postpone birth, in order to accumulate enough assets before being hit by the possibly
negative shocks related to having a child. This is also why more of them opt for permanent
childlessness voluntarily.

4.3     The Roots of Childlessness and Policy Analysis

The model also allows to decompose childlessness into the three parts mentioned in Section 3:
voluntary childlessness includes those who never try to have children; natural sterility includes
(a) those who wanted to have children at the beginning of the period considered, but could
not, and (b) those who tried later on and could not because of benchmark sterility π(0); and
postponement childlessness includes those who tried at some date τ > 0 to have children, but
failed because of increased sterility at τ , π(τ ) − π(0) > 0. The results are the following: the
total childlessness rate of 16.06% includes 11.1% of voluntary childlessness, 3.6% of natural
sterility, 0.96% of postponement childlessness, and 0.4% of sterile women not wanting children.

We now simulate the effect of two exogenous changes on women’s behavior. The first change
consists in the disappearance of the excess volatility undergone by mothers. Technically, we
set σ = 0. This means that mothers now face the same uncertainty as childless women. Steps
towards full insurance include a social security policy reducing mothers’ lack of income security,

                                               24
                               education cat.   perfect insurance   assisted procreation
        ∆ age at first birth          1                 0                     0
                                      2               -0.29                 0.55
                                      3               -7.57                 1.31
                                      4               -10.12                1.53
                                      5               -8.57                 1.27
                                     all              -3.75                 0.87
        ∆ childlessness rate          1                 0                   -0.03
                                      2               -1.04                 -1.29
                                      3               -2.10                 -2.28
                                      4               -4.62                 -4.34
                                      5               -4.27                 -4.36
                                     all              -1.42                 -1.84


        Table 5: Effect of Policy on Fertility Timing Choices, by Education Category

in the spirit of the parental leaves with job protection which have already been implemented
in various ways in some OECD countries but (nearly) not in the US. The second “policy” we
implement consists in very strong assisted procreation techniques, which amount to making
candidate mothers 5 years younger, i.e. the new π new (t) = π(t − 5).

Table 5 shows the results. The first policy drastically reduces the mean age at first birth for
education categories 3, 4, and 5. It also strongly reduces the childlessness rate for these cate-
gories. This policy operates by incentivizing low ω women to try to have children, whereas they
would opt for being voluntarily childless otherwise. This result again stresses the importance
of the additional uncertainty undergone by mothers for their procreation decision. Our results
echo those of Lalive and Zweimüller (2009), who show, in the case of Austrian reforms, that
“both cash transfers and job protection are relevant” to increase fertility (in their case, going
from one to two children).

The second policy affects childlessness negatively by allowing older parents to have children.
Yet the overall effect is barely stronger than that of the previous policy: childlessness drops by
-1.83 percentage points, instead of -1.42. Making people younger also has an “incentive” effect:
on average, people delay the birth of their first child by 0.89 year.




                                                25
4.4    Robustness to the Choice of Parameters

We now analyze how robust the above results are to different choices of the subjective time
discount rate ρ and the relative risk aversion parameter ε. Let us first consider ε. Changing
the value of ε affects the results in two very different ways. First, it affects the computation
of the returns r1 and r2 as a function of the observed growth rates ĝ1 and ĝ2 , and uncertainty
σ 2 . Let us call this effect a recalibration effect. Second, it affects the results by changing the
women’s preferences; it is a behavioral effect.

To assess the recalibration effect, one can use Equations (25)-(26) and see that reasonable values
for r1 and r2 require relatively strict conditions on ε. For example, imposing that childless
women enjoy a higher return than mothers (r1 > r2 ) but not by more than 4% (r1 < r2 + 0.04)
implies that ε should be between 4.19 and 5.90. Outside this interval, women will either always
want to have a child immediately (when r1 is close to r2 ), or never want to have children (when
r1 − r2 is large).

Keeping r1 and r2 at their benchmark values, we can analyze the behavioral effect of changing
ρ and ε on various outcomes. Table 6 provides the results. Given a range of values for ρ and ε
(first two columns), the table shows the three correlations between actual and simulated values
when the level of education varies. For the benchmark, in bold, the correlations summarize
the information given in Figure 3. The “fit” of the mean age at birth remains good for all the
parameters considered, but the “fit” of the childlessness rate deteriorates if ρ is large or ε small.
The last four columns of Table 6 show the main effect of the policies considered. The sixth
column shows that the size of the drop of about 4 years in the age at first birth following the
removal of additional uncertainty linked to motherhood is very robust (but when ρ = 0.06).
The drop in the childlessness rate however depends on the parameters. The last two columns
show that the size of the effect of medically assisted procreation, which is increasing by one
year the age at first birth and decreasing the childlessness rate by 2%, is quite consistent across
parametrizations.


4.5    Robustness to Sample Selection

In the benchmark analysis, we have used the sample of all women with a positive individual
income to deduce the parameters r1 , r2 , and σ from the distribution of income growth across
women. In this subsection, we first consider an alternative sample, that of women who are or
have been married. This reduces the sample by 16% but disproportionately affects the extreme
education categories (less than high school and more than college). The mean age at first birth
is almost unaffected by this selection, but the childlessness rate is reduced from 16.06% to


                                                 26
    Parameters              Overidentifying tests           Policy: σ = 0,   π new (t) = π(t − 5)
      ρ      ε    corr(E τ )    corr(cln)   corr(std. τ )   ∆τ      ∆ cln     ∆τ        ∆ cln
     0.02    3       0.94          0.78         0.95        -3.16   -3.03    +1.15      -2.14
     0.02    4       0.94          0.75         0.97        -3.53   -2.25    +1.04      -2.03
    0.02     5      0.95          0.82         0.95         -3.75   -1.42    +0.87      -1.84
     0.02    6       0.97          0.97         0.93        -3.83   -0.96    +0.78      -1.85
     0.01    5       0.96          0.86         0.92        -3.76   -0.95    +1.04      -1.85
    0.02     5      0.95          0.82         0.95         -3.75   -1.42    +0.87      -1.84
     0.04    5       0.94          0.73         0.97        -4.77   -3.27    +0.84      -2.21
     0.06    5       0.91          0.59         0.97        -4.91   -5.67    +0.83      -2.80
    Note: ‘cln’ = childlessness rate


                    Table 6: Effect of Changing ρ and ε on Fit and Policy

11.94%. Concerning the income processes examined through the lens of the quantile regression,
this “protecting” effect of education, which was 0.0190∗∗∗ for childless women and 0.0063∗ for
mothers in the full sample, is reduced to 0.0127∗∗∗ for childless women and remains the same at
0.0064∗ for mothers. It implies that the loss associated with being a mother is reduced when we
consider married women only: for the highest education category, r2 = 4.1% and r1 = 12.3%,
while they were given by r2 = 3.2% and r1 = 13.5% on the full sample.

The second robustness analysis is designed to address the issue of reverse causality between
parenthood and years of schooling. In the sample, some women might have decided to stop
schooling after their first child, rather than to postpone childbearing until they had completed
their education, i.e. for given r1 , r2 , and σ. We accordingly remove all women who had
children before the age of 16 from the sample (16 marks the end of compulsory schooling in
most US states during the period considered; see Appendix 2 in Angrist and Krueger (1991)).
This reduces the sample by 3.9%, but more so in the low-education category (12.9%). In the
selected sample, the average age at first birth increases to 23.33 instead of 22.93 in the full
sample. Childlessness also mechanically increases to 16.68%, as young mothers are removed
from the sample. The coefficients of the quantile regression are very similar to the benchmark.

Figures 4 and 5 in Appendix plot kernel density estimations of income growth for each education
category – to be compared with Figure1 for the full sample. Solid lines correspond to childless
women and dashed lines to mothers. It remains true in both smaller samples that the variance
of income growth is larger for mothers than for childless women. This is confirmed by the
(non-reported) estimations of the same quantile regressions.



                                                    27
    Sample              Nobs              Overidentifying tests            Policy: σ = 0,   π new (t) = π(t − 5)
                                corr(E τ )    corr(cln)    corr(std. τ )   ∆τ      ∆ cln     ∆τ        ∆ cln
    All                 4477       0.95         0.82           0.95        -3.75   -1.42    +0.87      -1.84
    Married             3761       0.94          0.63          0.68        -3.90   -1.14    +0.64       -1.24
    No teenage          4304       0.87          0.59          0.90        -4.06   -1.52    +0.49       -2.45
      (< 16) mothers
    Note: ‘cln’ = childlessness rate


                       Table 7: Effect of Changing Sample on Fit and Policy

The results of the simulations are presented in Table 7. In a nutshell, reducing the sample to
either married women or mothers with children above 15 worsens the fit of the model. It is
as if single women (either childless or mothers) and teenage mothers were part of the story we
tell, and help the model fit the facts. Abstracting from them however does not really affect the
conclusions about the effect of the insurance policy and of the medically assisted procreation
program.


5    Conclusion
We know from the literature that the opportunity cost of having children is greater for highly
educated women than for low-educated women. This leads the former to have fewer children or
to be childless more often, creating a differential fertility between the extremes of the education
spectrum (de la Croix and Doepke 2003, Vogl 2016). This paper highlights one important
channel of this mechanism by relying on the analogy between postponing birth and delaying
an irreversible investment.

We have seen from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 that education protects
against negative shocks to income. However, this protecting effect of education is stronger for
childless women than for mothers. It is very clear from the data that having children increases
income uncertainty, especially for the highly educated.

Facing this uncertainty, educated women expecting to have a child accumulate more assets,
in order to prevent a decrease in the certainty-equivalent asset growth. For them, postponing
birth has a value, the “option value of birth,” which corresponds to a “pure postponement
value” as defined by Mensik and Requate (2005).

Our approach also allows to precisely define a new notion of childlessness related to postpone-
ment. Some educated women will try to have children at some point, but a fraction of them
will fail. This type of childlessness has an involuntary component, but also a voluntary one


                                                          28
since, by postponing birth, women accept a lower probability of being fertile.

The calibration of the model shows that the income uncertainty aspect is paramount compared
to the biological clock. Indeed, if mothers could be insured against the income risk of having
children, the age at first birth for the more educated categories would drop very strongly.




                                              29
References
Adda, Jérôme, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens. 2017. “The Career Costs of Chil-
  dren.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (2): 293–337.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2014. “Maternal health and the baby boom.”
   Quantitative Economics 5 (2): 225–269.
      . 2016. “Gender Roles and Medical Progress.” Journal of Political Economy 124 (3):
   650–695.
Angelov, Nikolay, Per Johansson, and Erica Lindahl. 2013, April. “Gender Differences in
  Sickness Absence and the Gender Division of Family Responsibilities.” Iza discussion
  papers 7379, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
  Schooling and Earnings?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4): 979–1014.
Arrow, Kenneth, and Anthony Fisher. 1974. “Environmental Preservation, Uncertainty, and
   Irreversibility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 88:312–319.
Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 2001. Economic Growth. Cambridge MA: Mit Press.
Baudin, Thomas, David de la Croix, and Paula E. Gobbi. 2015. “Fertility and Childlessness
   in the US.” American Economic Review 105:1852–1882.
Boucekkine, Raouf, Aude Pommeret, and Fabien Prieur. 2013. “Optimal regime switching
   and threshold effects.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (12): 2979–2997.
Budig, Michelle J., and Paula England. 2001. “The Wage Penalty for Motherhood.” American
  Sociological Review 66:204–225.
Capatina, Elena, Michael Keane, and Shiko Maruyama. 2017. “Health Shocks and the Evo-
  lution of Consumption and Income over the Life-Cycle.” mimeo.
Chabé-Ferret, Bastien, and Paola Gobbi. 2016. “The Impact of Economic Uncertainty in
  Fertility Cycles: the Case of the Post WWII Baby Boom.” IRES, Université catholique de
  Louvain.
Cigno, Alessandro, and John Ermisch. 1989. “A Microeconomic Analysis of the Timing of
   Births.” European Economic Review 33:737–760.
Córdoba, Juan Carlos, and Marla Ripoll. 2016. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Fertili-
    tyIncome Relationship.” The Economic Journal 126 (593): 949–977.
Correll, Shelley J., Stephen Benard, and In Paik. 2007. “Getting a Job: Is There a Motherhood
   Penalty?” American Journal of Sociology 112 (5): 1297–1338.

                                            30
Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
   Economic Literature 47 (2): 448–474.
d’Albis, Hippolyte, Emmanuelle Augeraud Véron, and Katheline Schubert. 2010. “Demo-
   graphic – economic equilibria when the age at motherhood is endogenous.” Journal of
   Mathematical Economics 46 (6): 1211 – 1221.
d’Albis, Hippolyte, Angela Greulich, and Grégory Ponthière. 2015. Avoir un Enfant plus
   Tard. Enjeux Sociodémographiques du report des naissances. Paris: CEPREMAP.
de la Croix, David, and Matthias Doepke. 2003. “Inequality and Growth: Why Differential
   Fertility Matters.” American Economic Review 93 (4): 1091–113.
de la Croix, David, and Omar Licandro. 2013. “The Child is Father Of the Man: Implications
    for the Demographic Transition.” The Economic Journal 123 (567): 236–261.
Dixit, Avinash. 1992. “Investment and Hysteresis.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 6:107–
   132.
Dixit, Avinash, and Robert Pindyck. 1994. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton: Prince-
   ton University Press.
Doss, Brian, Galena K. Rhoades, Scott M. Stanley, and Howard J Markman. 2009. “The effect
   of the transition to parenthood on relationship quality: An 8-year prospective study.”
   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 96 (3): 601–619.
Fisher, Anthony, and Michael Hanemann. 1987. “Quasi-Option Value: Some Misconceptions
   Dispelled.” Journal of Envirnomental Economics and Management 16:23–37.
Francesconi, Marco. 2002. “A Joint Dynamic Model of Fertility and Work of Married Women.”
   Journal of Labor Economics 20 (2): 336–380.
French, Eric. 2005. “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and
   Retirement Behaviour.” The Review of Economic Studies 72 (2): 395–427.
Gauthier, Anne. 2007. “The impact of family policies on fertility in industrialized countries:
  a review of the literature.” Population Research and Policy Review 26:323–346.
Gayle, George-Levi, Limor Golan, and Mehmet A. Soytas. 2015, August. “What is the source
  of the intergenerational correlation in earnings?” Working papers 2015-19, Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis.
Gollier, Christian. 2001. The Economics of Risk and Time. Cambridge MA: Mit Press.
Guner, Nezih, Ezgi Kaya, and Virginia Sanchez Marcos. 2017. “Labor Market Frictions and
  Lowest Low Fertility.” Paper presented at the SED meeting Edinburgh.



                                             31
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, Junghoon Lee, and Nikolai Roussanov. 2007. “Intertemporal
  Substitution and Risk Aversion.” In Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6A, 3967–4056.
  Elsevier.
Hazan, Moshe, and Hosny Zoabi. 2013. “Do Highly Educated Women Choose Smaller Fami-
   lies?” The Economic Journal 125:1191–1226.
Heckman, James J, and Robert J Willis. 1976. “Estimation of a stochastic model of repro-
   duction: An econometric approach.” In Household production and consumption, 99–146.
   NBER.
Henry, Claude. 1974. “Investment Decisions under Uncertainty: the Irreversibility Effect.”
   American Economic Review 64:1006–1012.
Herr, Jane. 2016. “Measuring the effect of the timing of first birth on wages.” Journal of
   Population Economics 29 (1): 39–72 (January).
Hoem, Britta. 2000. “Entry into motherhood in Sweden: the influence of economic factors on
   the rise and fall of fertility, 1986-1997.” Demographic Research, vol. 2.
Hofmann, Barbara, and Katrin Hohmeyer. 2013. “Perceived Economic Uncertainty and Fer-
   tility: Evidence From a Labor Market Reform.” Journal of Marriage and Family 75 (2):
   503–521.
Jorion, Philippe, and Alberto Giovannini. 1993. “Time-series tests of a non-expected-utility
   model of asset pricing.” European Economic Review 37 (5): 1083–1100.
Kimball, Miles S. 1990. “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large.” Econometrica
   58 (1): 53–73.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. 1996. “The Equity Premium: It’s still a Puzzle.” Journal of
  Economic Literature 34 (1): 42–71.
Lalive, Rafael, and Josef Zweimüller. 2009. “Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and Return-
   to-Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 24
   (3): 1363–1402.
Léridon, Henri. 2004. “Can assisted reproduction technology compensate for the natural
    decline in fertility with age.” Human Reproduction 19 (7): 1548–1553.
      . 2005. “How effective is assisted reproduction technology? A model assessment.”
   Revue d’Épidémiologie et de Santé Publique 53:119–127.
Low, Corinne. 2013. “Pricing the Biological Clock: Reproductive Capital on the US Marriage
   Market.” Mimeo.




                                             32
Lundborg, Petter, Erik Plug, and Astrid Würtz Rasmussen. 2016. “Can Women Have Children
   and a Career? IV Evidence from IVF Treatments.” American Economic Review 107 (6):
   1611–37.
Mensink, Paul, and Till Requate. 2005. “The Dixit-Pindyck and the Arrow-Fisher-Hanemann-
  Henry Option Values are not Equivalent: a Note on Fisher (2000).” Resource and Energy
  Economics 27:83–88.
Meron, Monique, and Isabelle Widmer. 2002. “Unemployment leads women to postpone the
  birth of their first child.” Population - English Edition 57:301–330.
Miller, Amalia. 2011. “The effects of motherhood timing on career path.” Journal of Popu-
   lation Economics 24 (3): 1071–1100.
Munch, Allison, J. Miller McPherson, and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1997. “Gender, Children, and
  Social Contact: The Effects of Childrearing for Men and Women.” American Sociological
  Review 62 (4): 509–520.
Nugent, Jeffrey B. 1985. “The old-age security motive for fertility.” Population and develop-
  ment review, pp. 75–97.
Pailhé, Ariane, and Anne Solaz. 2012. “The influence of employment uncertainty on child-
   bearing in France: a tempo or quantum effect?” Demographic Research 26:1–40.
Pestieau, Pierre, and Grégory Ponthière. 2014. “Optimal Fertility along the Life Cycle.”
   Economic Theory 55:185–224.
      . 2015. “Optimal life-cycle Fertility in a Barro-Becker Economy.” Journal of Population
   Economics 28:45–87.
Pindyck, Robert. 1991. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment.” Journal of Economic
   Literature 29, no. 1110-1148.
Schneider, Daniel. 2015. “The Great Recession, Fertility, and Uncertainty: Evidence From
   the United States.” Journal of Marriage and Family 77 (5): 1144–1156.
Sheran, Michelle. 2007. “The Career and Family Choices of Women: A Dynamic Analysis
   of Labor Force Participation, Schooling, Marriage, and Fertility Decisions.” Review of
   Economic Dynamics 10:367–399.
Sommer, Kamila. 2016. “Fertility choice in a life cycle model with idiosyncratic uninsurable
   earnings risk.” Journal of Monetary Economics 83:27 – 38.
Turnovsky, Stephen J. 2000. Methods of macroeconomic dynamics. Cambridge MA: Mit Press.
Vogl, Tom. 2016. “Differential Fertility, Human Capital, and Development.” Review of
   Economic Studies 83:365–401.


                                            33
A      Solving the Post-Birth Program
We note the variable part of the value function as V (aτ ) = W2 (aτ ) − ω. The corresponding
Bellman equation is

              V (at ) = max u(ct )dt + e−ρ dt E [V (at+dt )]
                           
                               ct
                        ⇔ V (at ) = max {u(ct )dt + (1 − ρ dt) (V (at ) + E [dV (at )])}
                                             ct
                        ⇔ ρV (at )dt = max {u(ct )dt + (1 − ρ dt)E [dV (at )]}
                                                  ct


using e−ρ dt ≈ (1 − ρ dt) for small dt. To solve for the value function, we make an educated
                    a1−ε
guess, V (at ) = D2 1−ε
                     t
                         where D2 is a constant to be determined. According to Itô’s lemma:

                                           ∂V (at )            1 ∂ 2 V (at )
                        E [dV (at )] =              E[dat ] +                E[(dat )2 ]
                                            ∂at                2 ∂a2t
                                                                       
                                               1−ε          ct    ε 2
                                         = D2 at     r2 − − σ2 dt
                                                            at 2

as E[dat ] = (r2 at − ct )dt and E[(dat )2 ] = σ22 a2t dt (as (dt)2 ≈ 0, (dt)3/2 ≈ 0 and E[(dz)2 ] = dt)

The Bellman equation then becomes:

                                                  ct1−ε
                                                                             
                                                               1−ε      ct ε 2
                        ρV (at ) = max                  + D 2 at    r2 − − σ2
                                        ct        1−ε                   at 2

                                                                                 −1/ε
The first-order condition with respect to consumption is: ct = D2                       at . In order to determine
constant D2 , the Bellman equation can be rewritten:
                                                           1−ε
                                              −1/ε
                        a1−ε                 D2       at          ε 
                         t                                  −1/ε
                  ρD2               =     + D2 at1−ε r2 − D2     − σ22
                        1−ε      1−ε                               2
                                      −1/ε
                               ρ    D        
                                                      −1/ε  ε    
                            ⇔     = 2      + r2 − D2       − σ22
                              1−ε   1−ε                     2
                                       −1/ε
                               ρ    εD2             ε   
                            ⇔     =         + r2 − σ22
                              1−ε    1−ε             2
                                                                    −ε
                                            1                 ε 2 
                                    ⇔ D2 =     ρ + (ε − 1) r2 − σ2        = q −ε ,
                                            ε                  2

where q is defined in Equation (7). Therefore

                                                                    aτ1−ε
                                             W2 (aτ ) = q −ε              + ω.
                                                                    1−ε

                                                               34
B      Solving the Full Program
Standard integration by parts yields:

                                      Zτ                                  Zτ
                                            µt ȧt dt = µτ aτ − µ0 a0 −        µ̇t at dt,
                                       0                                  0


which allows to rewrite W (a0 ) as:

                              Zτ
                  W (a0 ) =            (H(ct , at , µt ) + µ̇t at ) dt + ϕ(τ, aτ ) − µτ aτ + µ0 a0 .
                                  0


The first-order variation of W (a0 ) with respect to the state and control variable’s path for a
given a0 but for τ and aτ free yields:

                            Zτ                                                                   
                                           ∂H(ct , at , µt )       ∂H(ct , at , µt )
             dW (a0 ) =                                      dat +                   dct + µ̇t dat dt
                                               ∂at                     ∂ct
                              0
                                                                        ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )       ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                            + [H(cτ , aτ , µτ ) + µ̇τ aτ ] dτ +                    daτ +            dτ
                                                                          ∂aτ              ∂τ
                            −µ̇τ aτ dτ − µτ daτ .

Rearranging terms leads to:

                                      Zτ                                             
                                 ∂H(ct , at , µt )                 ∂H(ct , at , µt )
                dW (a0 ) =                         + µ̇t dat +                       dct dt
                                      ∂at                              ∂ct
                           0
                                                             
                                                   ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                           + H(cτ , aτ , µτ ) +                 dτ
                                                     ∂τ
                                                
                               ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                           +              − µτ daτ .
                                 ∂aτ

A trajectory is (locally) optimal if any (local) departure from it decreases the value function,
that is dW (a0 ) ≤ 0 for any dat , t ∈ (0, τ ), for any dct , t ∈ (0, τ ), and for any dτ and daτ , which
gives the following necessary conditions for an interior maximizer:

                                                    ∂H(ct , at , µt )
                                                                        = 0
                                                             ∂ct
                                                ∂H(ct , at , µt )
                                                                  + µ̇t = 0
                                                    ∂at



                                                              35
                                                          ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                 H(cτ , aτ , µτ ) +                  = 0
                                                              ∂τ
                                                     ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                                                − µτ = 0
                                                       ∂aτ

The first two conditions are standard Pontryagin conditions. The last two conditions may be
interpreted as optimality conditions with respect to the switching time τ and the free state value
aτ . The third one equalizes the marginal benefit of waiting to the marginal cost of waiting.
The last one is a continuity condition: it implies that the shadow price of the state variable at
the time of the switch, µτ , is equal to the expected marginal value of the state variable in τ
(derived from the programs after the switch).

The two standard Pontryagin conditions imply:

                /ct   :   u0 (ct )e−ρt = µt
                /at   :   µ̇t /µt = −r1 ⇒ µt = µ0 e−r1 t
                                                                    r1 −ρ          −1/ε
                      ⇒ ċt /ct = (r1 − ρ)/ε ⇒ ct = c0 e ε t and ct = µt eρt

Therefore, the dynamics of assets can be rewritten as:
                                                                  r1 −ρ
                                         ȧt = r1 at − c0 e ε t
                                                                  r1 −ρ
Using a variable change xt = at e−r1 t we solve for xt = (c0 /p)e( ε −r1 )t + x, where p is defined
in Equation (6) and x is a constant to be determined. Therefore:

                                                c0 ( r1ε−ρ )t
                                       at =       e           + xer1 t
                                                p

Without the procreation option, the transversality condition would imply x = 0 and c0 would
be determined by a0 .

Moreover at t = 0:

                          a0 = cp0 + x
                                                            c0
                                 ⇔        x = a0 −
                                                            p
                                                                    
                                              c0 ( r1ε−ρ )t        c0 r1 t
                                 ⇒        at = e            + a0 −     e
                                              p                    p

                                              r1 t     c0 h ( r1ε−ρ )t    r1 t
                                                                               i
                                 at = a0 e           +     e           −e                     (27)
                                                       p



                                                         36
The fourth condition allows to find aτ as a function of τ :

                                         ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                                    − µτ = 0
                                           ∂aτ


                            ⇔ µτ = e−ρτ π(τ )q −ε + (1 − π(τ ))p−ε a−ε
                                                                 
                                                                    τ

                            ⇔ µτ = e−ρτ (s(τ )aτ )−ε
                            ⇒ µ0 = µτ er1 τ = e(r1 −ρ)τ (s(τ )aτ )−ε

where we have introduced the following notation:
                                                                         −1/ε
                               s(t) = π(t)q −ε + (1 − π(t))p−ε

which is valid in particular for t = τ . This allows to identify c0 as a function of τ and aτ :

                                                             −1/ε                 −1/ε
                 c0 = (µ0 )−1/ε = e(r1 −ρ)τ (s(τ )aτ )−ε             = e(r1 −ρ)τ           s(τ )aτ   (28)

Using (27) and (28), it is then possible to obtain an expression for aτ as a function of τ and a0 :

                                                     er1 τ
                                    aτ =                           a0                                (29)
                                            1 + s(τ ) [epτ − 1] /p

Note that without the procreation option, this expression would become:
                                                     r1 −ρ
                                             aτ = e ε τ a0

Therefore, it is possible to express X(τ ) the effect of the procreation option as follows:
                                                  r1 −ρ
                                         aτ = e ε τ X(τ )a0

with
                                                     epτ
                                    X(τ ) =
                                            1 + s(τ ) [epτ − 1] /p
X(τ ) ≥ 1 if and only if ε ≥ 1.
It is now possible to express the dynamics of at :
                                                              r1 −ρ
                                                   h                i
                                                epτ er1 t − e( ε )t
                                        

                               at = a0 er1 t −                                                     (30)
                                                 ps(τ ) + [epτ − 1]



                                                    37
                             r1 −ρ
In addition, using cτ = c0 e ε τ , Equations (28) and (30), it is possible to express consumption
as a function of τ only:
                                           epτ s(τ )             r1 −ρ
                                                                       τ
                                cτ =                        a0 e   ε
                                     1 + s(τ ) [epτ − 1] /p
Note that absent the procreation option, this expression would become:
                                                       r1 −ρ
                                             cτ = pe ε τ a0


Finally, the third condition gives a second relation between aτ and τ :

                                 ∂ϕ(τ, aτ )
            H(cτ , aτ , µτ ) +              =0
                                   ∂τ
              c1−ε
            ⇔  τ
                   e−ρτ + µτ (r1 aτ − cτ ) − ρϕ(τ, aτ )
             1−ε
                                                1−ε                     1−ε
                                                                        
                           −ρτ      0       −ε aτ           0       −ε aτ
                        +e        π (τ ) q           + ω − π (τ ) p            =0
                                              1−ε                     1−ε
              c1−ε
            ⇔ τ e−ρτ + µτ (r1 aτ − cτ ) − ρϕ(τ, aτ )
             1−ε
                                                1−ε                     1−ε
                                                                        
                           −ρτ      0       −ε aτ           0       −ε aτ
                        +e        π (τ ) q           + ω − π (τ ) p            =0
                                              1−ε                     1−ε
              c1−ε
            ⇔ τ e−ρτ + µτ (r1 aτ − cτ ) − ρϕ(τ, aτ )
             1−ε
                                                    a1−ε
                        + e−ρτ π 0 (τ ) q −ε − p−ε τ + e−ρτ π 0 (τ )ω = 0.
                                       
                                                     1−ε

To obtain a function of τ only, recall that

                                 s(τ )−ε =       π(τ )q −ε + (1 − π(τ ))p−ε
                                         = π(τ )(q −ε − p−ε ) + p−ε
                                           s(τ )−ε − p−ε
                                         ⇒                = q −ε − p−ε
                                                π(τ )

and
                                             c−ε
                                              τ e
                                                  −ρτ
                                                      = µτ

then

  c1−ε
   τ
       e−ρτ + r1 e−ρτ s(τ )−ε a1−ε
                               τ   − c1−ε
                                      τ e
                                          −ρτ
                                              − ρϕ(τ, aτ )
  1−ε
                                                      π 0 (τ )             a1−ε
                                               + e−ρτ          g(τ ) − p−ε τ + e−ρτ π 0 (τ )ω = 0
                                                      π(τ )                 1−ε



                                                     38
                                                        1−ε                        1−ε
                                                                                    
                                          −ρτ       −ε aτ                      −ε aτ
                   where ϕ(τ, aτ ) = e      π(τ ) q         + ω + (1 − π(τ ))p
                                                       1−ε                       1−ε
                                                                    a 1−ε
                                   = e−ρτ π(t)q −ε + (1 − π(τ ))p−ε τ + e−ρτ π(τ )ω
                                          
                                                                     1−ε
                                                   1−ε
                                                 a
                                   = e−ρτ s(τ )−ε τ + e−ρτ π(τ )ω
                                                 1−ε

therefore

       εc1−ε                            1−ε
                                                       π 0 (τ )             a1−ε
                                                   
                                    −ε aτ
         τ              1−ε
             + r1 g(τ )aτ − ρ s(τ )         + π(τ )ω +          g(τ ) − p−ε τ + π 0 (τ )ω = 0
       1−ε                            1−ε              π(τ )                 1−ε

  εcτ1−ε                             1−ε
                                             π 0 (τ )              1−ε
                                        
                   −ε 1−ε        −ε aτ                     −ε   −ε aτ
⇔        + r1 s(τ ) aτ − ρ s(τ )           +          s(τ ) − p         = (ρπ(τ ) − π 0 (τ )) ω
  1−ε                              1−ε       π(τ )                 1−ε
Recall
                                                        r1 −ρ
                                           cτ = c0 e ε τ = (g(τ ))−1/ε aτ

Therefore:
                                                                                              !
                    ε (s(τ ))1−ε                ρs(τ )−ε π 0 (τ ) s(τ )−ε − p−ε
         a1−ε
          τ                      + r1 s(τ )−ε −         +                                          = (ρπ(τ ) − π 0 (τ )) ω
                       1−ε                       1−ε      π(τ )        1−ε

and using the expression for aτ we obtain an implicit expression for τ , as a function of a0 .
                                    ε−1
      (1−ε)r1 τ       s(τ ) pτ
  e                1+       [e − 1]
                        p
                                                     1 π 0 (τ )       p−ε                   π 0 (τ )
                                                                                                
                           ε        −ε
                      ×       s(τ )      p − s(τ ) −              1−            = π(τ ) ρ −            ωaε−1
                                                                                                         0
                        ε−1                           π(τ )         s(τ )−ε                π(τ )

The value function of the full program is:
                                                                    r1 −ρ
                                                                               1−ε
                                          Zτ       s(τ )X(τ )a0 e      ε
                                                                           t

                            W (a0 ) =                                                 e−ρt dt + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                                           1−ε
                                          0
                                                                     Zτ
                                       (s(τ )X(τ )a0 )1−ε
                                     =                                    e−pt dt + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                             1−ε
                                                                    0
                                                                  τ
                                                                1−ε 
                                       (s(τ )X(τ )a0 )     −1 −pt
                                     =                       e       + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                             1−ε           p       0
                                       (s(τ )X(τ )a0 )1−ε −1 −pτ 1
                                                                      
                                     =                       e     +     + ϕ(τ, aτ )
                                             1−ε           p         p



                                                                39
C         Proofs

C.1         Proof of Proposition 2

For r2 ≥ r1 and σ = 0, it is possible to show that ∂W∂τ(a0 ) < 0, thus proving the first part of the
proposition.

To prove the second part of the proposition, we rewrite Equation (23) as (see Appendix B):

                                   ε−1
      (1−ε)r1 τ       s(τ ) pτ
  e                1+       [e − 1]
                        p
                                               1 π 0 (τ )      p−ε                   π 0 (τ )
                                                                                         
                      ε        −ε
                   ×      s(τ )    p − s(τ ) −             1−            = π(τ ) ρ −            ωaε−1
                                                                                                  0   (31)
                     ε−1                        π(τ )        s(τ )−ε                π(τ )

In the neighborhood of τ = 0, since π 0 (τ ) = 0, it can be simplified to:
                                                    ε−1
                                         s(τ ) pτ          ε
                     e   (1−ε)r1 τ
                                      1+      [e − 1]         s(τ )−ε (p − s(τ )) = π(τ )ρωaε−1
                                                                                            0
                                          p               ε−1

The right-hand side of this equation is always positive and finite. For r2 = r1 and σ = 0,
the left-hand side (LHS) of the equation is equal to zero. In addition, ∂LHS(τ )/∂σ > 0 and
limσ→σmax LHS → ∞ with σmax = [2(r2 − ρ/(1 − ε)/ε]1/2 . Therefore, there exists σ > 0 such
that σ > σ ⇔ τ ∗ > 0 . This proves the second part of the proposition.

To prove the third part of the proposition, we compare the functions W1 (aτ ) and W2 (aτ ). We
have limσ→σmax W2 (aτ ) → −∞ for a finite aτ , while W1 (aτ ) remains finite as it is not affected
by σ. Therefore, limσ→σmax τ ∗ → +∞. In addition, ∂W∂σ    2 (aτ )
                                                                  < 0 and we know from the first part
of the proposition that for r2 = r1 and σ = 0, it is optimal to get pregnant as soon as possible.
Therefore, there exists a value σ̄ of σ that is sufficiently large to have τ ∗ ≥ T if σ > σ̄.


C.2         Proof of Proposition 3

For τ ≥ T and τ ≤ 0, we have π 0 (τ ) = 0. Under the assumption π 0 (τ ) = 0 and τ finite, the
derivative of the LHS and of the RHS of Equation (31) with respect to τ and ω can be written:

                                                                                   
                  ∂LHS   (1−ε)r1 τ       −                   s(τ ) pτ             pτ
                       =e          εs(τ ) (p − s(τ )) −r1 1 +      (e − 1) + s(τ )e
                   ∂τ                                          p
                                      ∂LHS      ∂RHS      ∂RHS
                                           = 0,      = 0,      = π(τ )ρaε−1
                                                                        0   >0
                                       ∂ω        ∂τ        ∂ω


                                                            40
For ρ < r1 and π 0 (τ ) = 0, the LHS is then a decreasing function for all τ which ensures ω̄ < ω̃.
ρ < r1 and τ in the neighborhood of 0 and T (which ensures π 0 (τ ) = 0 ) are sufficient, together
with continuity, to yield the existence and uniqueness of ω̄ and ω̃.


D         Kernel Density Estimations of Income Growth Dis-
          tribution - Alternative Samples

                     All                                 Category (1)                             Category (2)

    10                                       10                                       10

    8                                        8                                        8

    6                                        6                                        6

    4                                        4                                        4

    2                                        2                                        2

    0                                        0                                        0

         −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




                Category (3)                             Category (4)                             Category (5)

    10                                       10                                       10

    8                                        8                                        8

    6                                        6                                        6

    4                                        4                                        4

    2                                        2                                        2

    0                                        0                                        0

         −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




Figure 4: Kernel density estimations of individual income growth distribution by education
category. Married women. Childless women (solid) and mothers (dashed)




                                                           41
                    All                                 Category (1)                             Category (2)

   10                                       10                                       10

   8                                        8                                        8

   6                                        6                                        6

   4                                        4                                        4

   2                                        2                                        2

   0                                        0                                        0

        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




               Category (3)                             Category (4)                             Category (5)

   10                                       10                                       10

   8                                        8                                        8

   6                                        6                                        6

   4                                        4                                        4

   2                                        2                                        2

   0                                        0                                        0

        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3        −0.3   −0.1 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3




Figure 5: Kernel density estimations of individual income growth distribution by education
category. All women except teenage (< 16) mothers. Childless women (solid) and mothers
(dashed)




                                                          42
ISSN 1379-244X D/2017/3082/16
