university of copenhagen


 Københavns Universitet




 Women's perceptions of fertility assessment and counselling 6 years after attending a
 Fertility Assessment and Counselling clinic in Denmark


 Koert, E; Sylvest, R; Vittrup, I; Hvidman, H W; Birch Petersen, K; Boivin, J; Nyboe Andersen,
 A; Schmidt, L


 Published in:
 Human Reproduction Open


 DOI:
 10.1093/hropen/hoaa036


 Publication date:
 2020


 Document version
 Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record


 Document license:
 CC BY


 Citation for published version (APA):
 Koert, E., Sylvest, R., Vittrup, I., Hvidman, H. W., Birch Petersen, K., Boivin, J., Nyboe Andersen, A., & Schmidt,
 L. (2020). Women's perceptions of fertility assessment and counselling 6 years after attending a Fertility
 Assessment and Counselling clinic in Denmark. Human Reproduction Open, 2020(4), Article hoaa036.
 https://doi.org/10.1093/hropen/hoaa036




 Download date: 25. Aug. 2026
Human Reproduction Open, pp. 1–12, 2020
doi:10.1093/hropen/hoaa036


                                    ORIGINAL ARTICLE


                                    Women’s perceptions of fertility
                                    assessment and counselling 6 years
                                    after attending a Fertility Assessment
                                    and Counselling clinic in Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
                                    E. Koert 1,2,*, R. Sylvest2, I. Vittrup1, H.W. Hvidman1,
                                    K. Birch Petersen3, J. Boivin4, A. Nyboe Andersen1, and
                                    L. Schmidt 2
                                    1
                                     Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Fertility Clinic, 4071, Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen DK-2100 Ø, Denmark 2Section of
                                    Social Medicine, Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, PO Box 2099, Copenhagen DK-1014 K,
                                    Denmark 3StorkKlinik, The Fertility Partnership, St. Kongensgade 40G, 1264 Copenhagen, Denmark 4School of Psychology, Cardiff
                                    University, Tower Building, 70 Park Place, Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK

                                    *Correspondence address. Section of Social Medicine, Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, PO
                                    Box 2099, Copenhagen DK-1014K, Denmark. E-mail: emko@sund.ku.dk https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9359-7499

                                    Submitted on March 24, 2020; resubmitted on May 13, 2020; editorial decision on June 30, 2020


   STUDY QUESTION: What are women’s perceptions and experience of fertility assessment and counselling 6 years after attending a
   Fertility Assessment and Counselling (FAC) clinic in Denmark?
   SUMMARY ANSWER: Women viewed the personalized fertility knowledge and advice they received as important aids to decision-
   making and they felt the beneﬁts outweighed the risks of receiving personalized fertility information.
   WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Many young people wish to become parents in the future. However, research demonstrates there is a
   gap in women’s and men’s knowledge of fertility and suggests they may be making fertility decisions based on inaccurate information.
   Experts have called for the development of interventions to increase fertility awareness so that men and women can make informed fertil-
   ity decisions and achieve their family-building goals. Since 2011, the FAC clinic in Copenhagen, Denmark has provided personalized fertility
   assessment and guidance based on clinical examination and evaluation of individual risk factors. Available qualitative research showed that
   attending the FAC clinic increased fertility awareness and knowledge and was experienced as a catalyst for change (e.g. starting to con-
   ceive, pursuing fertility treatment, ending a relationship) in women 1-year post-consultation.
   STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The study was a 6-year follow-up qualitative study of 24 women who attended the FAC clinic
   between January and June 2012. All women were interviewed during a 2-month period from February to March 2018 at Rigshospitalet,
   their home or ofﬁce, in Copenhagen, Denmark. Interviews were held in English and ranged between 60 and 94 min (mean 73 min).
   PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Invitations to participate in an interview-based follow-up study were sent to
   141 women who attended the FAC clinic in 2012. In total, 95 women read the invitation, 35 conﬁrmed interest in participating and 16 de-
   clined to participate. Twenty-ﬁve interviews were booked and 24 interviews held. Interviews followed a semi-structured format regarding
   reasons for attending the FAC clinic, if/how their needs were met, and perceptions of fertility assessment and counselling. Data were ana-
   lysed using thematic analysis.
   MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: At the follow-up interview, women were on average 39.5 years old. Ten were cur-
   rently single or dating and 14 were married/cohabiting. All were childless when they attended the FAC clinic. At the follow-up interview,
   21 women were parents (14 women with one child; 6 with two children; 1 with three children) and the remaining three women intended
   to have children in the future. The most common reason for originally attending the FAC clinic was to determine how long they could de-
   lay childbearing. Most of the women now believed their needs for attending had been met. Those who were dissatisﬁed cited a desire for
   more exact (‘concrete’) information as to their remaining years of fertility, although acknowledged that this was likely not realistic. Women
   stated that they had felt reassured as to their fertility status after attending the FAC clinic whilst receiving the message that they could not
   delay childbearing ‘too long’. Women viewed personalized fertility knowledge as an important aid to decision-making but cautioned about


V The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.
C

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
2                                                                                                                                                    Koert et al.


    developing a false sense of security about their fertility and chance of conceiving in the future based on the results. Although women were
    generally satisﬁed with their experience, they wished for more time to discuss options and to receive additional guidance after their initial
    meeting at the FAC clinic.
    LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Participants were from a group of Danish women attending the FAC clinic and interviews
    were conducted in English, which means they are not representative of all reproductive-aged women. Nevertheless, the study group in-
    cluded a broad spectrum of women who achieved parenthood through different means (heterosexual/lesbian relationship, single parent
    with donor, co-parent) with various family sizes, and women who were currently childless.
    WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our study provides support for an individualized approach to fertility education,
    assessment and counselling provided at a time when the information is relevant to the individual and their current fertility decision-making.
    The ﬁndings suggest that although satisﬁed with their visit to the FAC clinic, the women wished for more information and guidance after this
    visit, suggesting that the current intervention may need to be expanded or new interventions developed to meet these additional needs.




                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
    STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): E.K. was funded by an ESHRE Travel/Training grant by ReproUnion, co-ﬁnanced by
    the European Union, Interreg V OKS. J.B. reports that the risk evaluation form used at the Fertility Assessment Clinic was inspired by the
    Fertility Status Awareness Tool FertiSTAT that was developed at Cardiff University for self-assessment of reproductive risk. J.B. also
    reports personal fees from Merck KGaA, Merck AB, Theramex, Ferring Pharmaceuticals A/S and a research grant from Merck Serono Ltd
    outside the submitted work. A.N.A. has received personal fees from both Merck Pharmaceuticals and Ferring and grants from Roche
    Diagnostics outside the submitted work. The other authors report no conﬂicts of interest.

     Key words: counselling / qualitative research / reproductive decision-making / fertility assessment / fertility education




    WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR PATIENTS?
    In this study, 24 women were interviewed 6 years after they had attended the Fertility Assessment and Counselling (FAC) clinic in 2012.
    The FAC clinic was started in Copenhagen, Denmark as a fertility awareness intervention to give men and women who are considering
    having children in the future the opportunity to learn about their current fertility and identify any risk factors that might make it difﬁcult to
    become pregnant/father a child in the future. The goal of the FAC clinic is to give men and women the information they need to make in-
    formed choices about their fertility and to achieve their family plans.
       Our ﬁndings showed that women attended the FAC clinic because they wanted to know how long they could safely wait to have a child
    because they wanted to postpone their family plans. Most felt satisﬁed with the FAC clinic visit and believed their needs had been met.
    Women said they felt reassured about their fertility and chance of having a child in the future but also said they understood they should
    not wait ‘too long’ to have children. Women believed the information they received at the FAC clinic helped with their decision-making,
    but warned against developing a false sense of security about their chances of becoming pregnant in the future based on the information
    provided. Overall, the women felt the beneﬁts (e.g. facilitates informed decision-making) outweighed the risks (e.g. information may inﬂu-
    ence behaviour) of receiving individual fertility information. Our study provides support for fertility awareness efforts in women to include
    interventions that are personalized, timely and relevant to the person’s stage of life and current fertility decision-making.



                                                                                 ..
Introduction                                                                      ..    men and women’s knowledge and called for interventions to increase
                                                                                   ..   fertility awareness (Pedro et al., 2018). Current efforts have been two-
Women and men in high-resource countries are delaying parenthood ..                     pronged: the development of broad fertility educational strategies (e.g.
                                                                                    .
and the average age at first birth has steadily increased over the last ..              brochure, video, website) aimed at increasing knowledge and influenc-
                                                                                    .
40 years in Western Europe and North America, and the last 25 years ..                  ing fertility intentions across different age groups (e.g. Williamson
                                                                                    .
in Eastern European countries (Schmidt et al., 2012). The current aver- ..              et al., 2014; Daniluk and Koert, 2015; Garcia et al., 2016; Maeda et al.,
                                                                                    .
age age at first birth for women in Denmark is 29.3 years (Statistics ...               2016; Conceiç~ao et al., 2017; Hammarberg et al., 2017; Boivin et al.,
Denmark, 2018). Whilst there are benefits of delaying parenthood ...                    2018a,b), and the development of personalized fertility assessments
(e.g. career stability, financial stability, emotional readiness; Mills et al., ..
                                                                                    .
                                                                                        and guidance that are tailored to each individual (e.g. Bunting and
2011), there are also consequences such as increases in age-related in- ..
                                                                                    .
                                                                                        Boivin, 2010; Stern et al., 2013; Hvidman et al., 2015), with the major-
                                                                                    .
fertility, not achieving desired family size and unintentional childlessness ..         ity of efforts focused on the former.
                                                                                    .
(Leridon and Slama, 2008; Habbema et al., 2015). Research highlighting ..                  The Fertility Assessment and Counselling (FAC) clinic was opened
                                                                                    .
the gaps in men and women’s fertility knowledge suggests that they ..                   in Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, in Copenhagen,
                                                                                    .
may be making decisions to delay parenthood based on misinforma- ...                    Denmark at the end of 2011. The overall goal of the clinic is to in-
tion and inaccurate assumptions about fertility. A recent systematic re- ...            crease women’s and men’s fertility awareness in terms of general
view on 71 articles assessing fertility awareness confirmed the gaps in .
                                                                                    .   knowledge on fertility and to provide a guide to their own status and
Six-year follow-up of fertility assessment/counselling                                                                                                                                                                        3

                                                                      ..
                                                                       .. Danish Data Protection Agency. Participants provided consent to par-
help them fulfil their family-building goals (i.e., timing of children, de-
sired family size; Hvidman et al., 2015). Men and women with no         .. ticipate in the study.
                                                                         ..
known fertility problems can make an appointment to attend the FAC        ..
clinic without referral. Free-of-charge consultations are provided by a    ... Study design
specialist in reproductive medicine and include a risk assessment            ..
                                                                              .. This was a qualitative follow-up study of 24 women who had attended
(based on personal medical and reproductive history and lifestyle fac-         .. the FAC clinic 6 years prior to the current data collection. The 6-year
tors) and a clinical evaluation (women: antral follicle count (AFC), anti-      ..
                                                                                 .. criteria were selected given that this was the longest follow-up period
Müllerian hormone (AMH) test; men: semen analysis). Men and                      .. available since the first year of operation. To participate, women
women are provided with an estimate of their reproductive potential
                                                                                   ..
                                                                                    .. needed to have attended the FAC clinic alone or with a partner be-
and offered advice based on their personal risk profile along with gen-              .. tween January and June 2012 and be willing to be interviewed in per-
eral information about age-related fertility decline and risk factors for
                                                                                      ..
                                                                                       .. son and in English. There were no restrictions based on parenthood
                                                                                        ..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
fertility problems (Hvidman et al., 2015).
    In earlier studies from the FAC clinic, Hvidman et al. (2015) outlined
                                                                                         .. status. The FAC clinic has been open for all women, men and couples
                                                                                          .. who wish to attend and make an appointment except those that al-
the creation of the concept, presented data on the first 916 women                         ..
                                                                                            .. ready had known infertility (Hvidman et al., 2015). For the women,
seen at the FAC clinic and showed that 70% of women stated that the                          .. there have been no criteria in terms of parity, but in practice the large
reason for making an appointment was a wish for an estimate of how                            ..
                                                                                               .. majority of the women have been nulliparous, and in the present sam-
long they could safely delay childbearing. A study examining an older co-                       .. ple none of the women who participated had a child at the time they
hort of women attending the FAC clinic (aged 35–43 years) found similar                          ..
                                                                                                  .. attended the FAC clinic.
reasons cited (Birch Petersen et al., 2015), which may also be due to                              ..
overlap in this study population and Hvidman’s et al.’s (2015) sample                               ..
                                                                                                     .. Data collection
(i.e., inclusion of same participants). Concern about their fertility was                             ..
also an often cited reason for attending (Birch Petersen et al., 2015;                                 .. The names and Danish Personal Identification (CPR) number of the
                                                                                                        .. women who had attended the FAC clinic in the first year of operating
Hvidman et al., 2015). A qualitative study involving interviews with 20                                  ..
cohabiting or single women (age 34–39 years) before their FAC clinic
                                                                                                          .. (January to June 2012) were extracted from a database of women
                                                                                                           ..
visit provided further insight into women’s concerns, with women sharing                                    .. who agreed to be contacted for future research. We sorted partici-
their fears about infertility and describing how their ‘biological clock was
                                                                                                             .. pants according to their date of attendance starting from January
                                                                                                              ..
ticking’ and they wished to ‘buy more time’ (Birch Petersen et al., 2016).                                     .. 2012. Potential participants were selected consecutively in batches of
    Sylvest and colleagues (2018) conducted a 1-year follow-up study
                                                                                                                .. 40 women until data collection was completed. Recruitment notices
                                                                                                                 ..
with the 20 single or cohabiting women in Birch Petersen et al.’s (2016)                                          .. were sent using the national Health Care electronic system linked to
                                                                                                                   .. the CPR number. This system sends an email alert to citizens when
study whom had been interviewed before attending the FAC clinic.                                                    ..
Findings showed that attending the FAC clinic increased women’s fertility                                            .. new information has been added to their account (e.g. medical test
                                                                                                                      .. results, referral to specialist). They must log in to access the informa-
awareness and was experienced as a catalyst for behaviour change and                                                   ..
action (e.g. starting to try to conceive, seeking fertility treatment, ending                                           .. tion. The recruitment notice included a brief introduction to the study
                                                                                                                         .. and a link to an online survey where they could register their re-
relationship). Those who took action did not experience any regrets.                                                      ..
Some of the women identified that they were still in ‘limbo’ and had not                                                   .. sponse: Yes, interested in participating; Yes interested and wished for
                                                                                                                            .. more information or Not interested. No reimbursement for participat-
started to try to become pregnant at the 1-year mark. There is growing                                                       ..
support for the inclusion of qualitative methods in assessing the accept-                                                     .. ing was provided. In total, 141 notices were sent, with 95 women
                                                                                                                               .. opening the notice and 51 entering a response (35 interested and 16
ability and usefulness of an intervention, including examining participants’                                                    ..
experiences with and perceptions of the intervention (Bowen et al.,
                                                                                                                                 .. not interested). Ultimately, 24 interviews were held due to scheduling
                                                                                                                                  .. or other issues (e.g. cancelled due to illness, not available during inter-
2009). Qualitative methods allow for an in-depth exploration of a com-                                                             ..
plex experience about which we know little (Patton, 2014). There have
                                                                                                                                    .. view period). In qualitative research, a specific sample size is not pre-
                                                                                                                                     .. determined, rather it is necessary to collect enough data to yield rich
been no long-term qualitative follow-up studies conducted on FAC                                                                      ..
attendees beyond the 1-year mark. As such, we know less about the
                                                                                                                                       .. and detailed information regarding the phenomenon under study
                                                                                                                                        ..
long-term experience and impact of attending the FAC clinic. The pur-                                                                    .. (Morse, 2000; Braun and Clarke, 2016). As such, recruitment, data
                                                                                                                                          .. collection and data analysis occur concurrently. Saturation of data,
pose of this study was to examine women’s perceptions and experience                                                                       ..
of fertility assessment and counselling 6 years after attending the FAC                                                                     .. wherein no new themes or information emerge from each subsequent
                                                                                                                                             .. interview, is used as a criterion for how much data should be collected
clinic. This knowledge could help us understand whether women’s                                                                               ..
needs are being met by attending the FAC clinic and how to adapt the                                                                           .. and to ensure trustworthiness of the study’s findings (Saunders et al.,
                                                                                                                                                .. 2018). Researchers have found that data saturation often occurs after
intervention to better meet their needs.                                                                                                         ..
                                                                                                                                                  .. 12 interviews but underscore that there is variability across studies
                                                                                                                                                   .. (Guest et al., 2006). The concept of information power has also been
                                                                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                                                                     .. used to determine a suitable sample size in qualitative research, which
Materials and methods                                                                                                                                 .. suggests that the more information that the sample holds that is rele-
                                                                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                                                                                        .. vant for the study, the lower the number of participants needed
Ethical approval                                                                                                                                         .. (Malterud et al., 2016). In this study, conducting over 20 interviews
                                                                                                                                                          ..
According to Danish law, interview studies do not require permission .. allowed us to gain an in-depth, nuanced understanding of the experi-
from a scientific ethics committee. The research was approved by the . ence and perceptions of the FAC clinic from a wide range of personal
                                                                                                                                                           .
4                                                                                                                                                                    Koert et al.


trajectories (e.g. relationship status, sexual orientation, parenthood sta-
                                                                              Table I Participant demographics, parental status and
tus) and to ensure the data saturation criterion was met and there            fertility details.
was ample information power.
   Interviews were held in person at the location of the woman’s                                                                                                        N (%)
                                                                              ......................................................................................................
choice in Copenhagen (work place, home, Rigshospitalet) over a 2-
                                                                              Demographics
month period in 2018 (February to March). Interviews ranged from 60
                                                                              Age at intervention (years M (SD))                                                      33.5 (3.4)
to 94 min (average 73 min). Interviews were conducted by the first au-
thor, an experienced psychologist and qualitative interviewer/re-             Age (current) (years M (SD))                                                            39.5 (3.4)
searcher. The interviews were in-depth and semi-structured. The               Marital status at intervention
interview guide included questions to explore the following topics: rea-         Married/cohabiting                                                                    9 (38%)
sons for attending, if/how their needs had been met, their understand-           Single                                                                               15 (63%)




                                                                                                                                                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
ing of the information provided, and general perceptions of the FAC           Marital status (current)
clinic and fertility assessment and counselling, along with questions            Married/cohabiting                                                                   14 (58%)
about their fertility decision-making after the FAC clinic visit. Follow-up      Single                                                                               10 (42%)
questions were used to probe for in-depth accounts. Interviews were           Education level (after high school)
transcribed verbatim by the first author. The data specific to the topics        Low (<3 years)                                                                         1 (4%)
of reasons for attending, needs, their understanding of the information          Medium (3–4 years)                                                                   13 (54%)
provided, and general perceptions of FAC/fertility assessment and                High (þ4 years)                                                                      10 (42%)
counselling are included in this article. Each topic is identified by a       Parental status and fertility details
broad title and number, and the themes and subthemes within each              Parental status at intervention
topic are described in detail.
                                                                                 No children                                                                         24 (100%)
                                                                              Parental status (current)
Data analysis                                                                    No children                                                                           3 (13%)
The transcript data were analysed using an iterative process and guided          Parents                                                                              21 (88%)
by Braun and Clarke’s (2006) phases of thematic analysis: familiarizing            Partnered                                                                          14 (67%)
self with the data (transcribing, reading and re-reading transcripts); de-         Solo mother                                                                         7 (33%)
veloping initial codes (coding small sections (quotations) in a systematic    Year tried to become pregnant (n ¼ 21)a
fashion across the data set, combining data relevant to each code); de-          Before FAC clinic                                                                      1 (5%)
veloping initial themes (grouping codes into potential themes, gathering
                                                                                 First year after attending                                                            9 (43%)
all data relevant to themes); reviewing themes (checking themes in rela-
                                                                                 Second year                                                                            1 (5%)
tion to the coded quotations and entire data set); defining and renam-
                                                                                 Third year                                                                            4 (19%)
ing themes (ongoing analysis and revision of themes through discussion
                                                                                 Fourth year                                                                           5 (24%)
and reflection); and producing the report (selection of vivid examples
                                                                                 Pregnant without trying                                                                1 (5%)
and finalizing analysis). To maintain trustworthiness of the analytic pro-
                                                                              Number of children (n ¼ 21)
cess, at each stage two or more co-authors read the first author’s initial
analysis and provided feedback, which was discussed in detail and inte-          1 childb                                                                             14 (67%)
grated into the next phase of analysis.                                          2 children                                                                            6 (29%)
                                                                                 3 children                                                                             1 (5%)
                                                                              Number of deliveries and type of conception
                                                                                 Partnered women
Results                                                                            Deliveries                                                                              20
Demographic information and fertility details are provided in Table I.             Natural conception                                                                 15 (75%)
All women were childless when attending the FAC clinic in 2012. Most               MARc                                                                                5 (25%)
(21 women, 88%) reported they had tried to become pregnant in the                Solo mothers
6 years after attending the FAC clinic, with almost half (9 women, 43%)            Deliveries                                                                               9
starting to try in the first year. Of those who tried to have a child, all         MAR                                                                                9 (100%)
(n ¼ 21) had become parents to at least one child (14 women with
                                                                              Wished for more children (n ¼ 21)
one child; 6 with two children; 1 with three children). The three
                                                                                 No (all had 2–3 children or currently pregnant)                                       8 (38%)
remaining women reported they intended to have children in the future
                                                                                 Yes                                                                                  13 (62%)
(age range 37–42 years). A description of the themes and subthemes
under the four broad topic areas is provided. The topic areas, pre-           All details are at follow-up interview (current) unless indicated.
sented below, include: Reasons for attending; If and how their needs          Intervention ¼ attending Fertility Assessment and Counselling (FAC) clinic in 2012.
                                                                              Cohabiting ¼ living together.
were met; Interpretations and understanding of information received;          MAR¼ medically assisted reproduction (including any form of fertility treatment).
and Perceptions of the FAC clinic and fertility assessment and counsel-       a
                                                                                Does not include three women with no attempts to become pregnant and no children.
                                                                              b
ling. See Fig. 1 for a Thematic Map of the four topic areas, themes and         Two women were currently pregnant with second child.
                                                                              c
                                                                                Includes two deliveries conceived with donor insemination from lesbian couple.
subthemes and Tables II–V for illustrative quotations.
Six-year follow-up of fertility assessment/counselling                                                                                                              5




                                                                                                  2. IF AND HOW THEIR NEEDS WERE MET
                               1. REASONS FOR ATTENDING
                                                                                                                       Needs met
                               Seeking Information and reassurance                           a) Increased knowledge
                   a) Wish for information and knowledge                                     b) Sense of reassurance
                   b) Confirmation and reassurance regarding delay and future                c) “Kick in the butt” – Motivation to decide and act
                   pregnancy
                   c) Concern about fertility                                                                        Unmet needs
                   d) Aid for decision-making                                                a) Wish for concrete, simple answer
                                                                                             b) Sense of uncertainty – perceived conflicting information
                                                                                             c) Wish for more information and/or discussion of options




                                                                                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
                                                  Women’s perceptions and experience of fertility
                                                    assessment and counselling 6 years after
                                                           attending the FAC Clinic




                                                                                                 4. PERCEPTIONS OF THE FAC CLINIC AND
                                                                                                FERTILITY ASSESSMENT AND COUNSELLING
                      3. INTERPRETATIONS AND UNDERSTANDING
                              OF INFORMATION RECEIVED                                           Need for caution when providing high stakes information
                                                                                            a) Must manage expectations of information provided
                                         There’s no problem                                 b) Risk of misinterpretation of information
                       a) Everything looks “fine”                                           c) Possibility of creating false security
                       b) “Good” results equal certainty of pregnancy in                    d) May cause distress
                          future                                                            e) Risk of information influencing behaviour
                       c) Focus on confirmatory information – it’s OK or safe               f) Information provided may not be sufficient
                          to wait
                       d) But don’t wait too long                                                   Benefits of receiving information outweigh costs
                                                                                            a) Value of increased awareness and knowledge
                                        There’s a problem                                   b) Facilitates informed decision-making
                       a) Need to act now or in near future                                 c) Builds sense of control and empowerment
                                                                                            d) Provides sense of reassurance regarding delay of
                                    There could be a problem                                   pregnancy
                                                                                            e) Use as a preventative tool
                       a) No guarantees




  Figure 1. Thematic map of the four topic areas, themes and subthemes. Numbered items are broad labels for topic areas. Themes are
  centred and subthemes are listed by lowercase letters. FAC, Fertility Assessment and Counselling.




  Table II Illustrative themes, subthemes and quotations: Reasons for attending.

  Seeking information and reassurance
  (a) Wish for information and knowledge
  ‘I came in to know my fertility and I went out knowing my fertility. Like knowing there shouldn’t be a problem’.
  (b) Conﬁrmation and reassurance regarding delay and future pregnancy
  ‘It was important to ﬁnd out that I could wait to be honest. . .because I wasn’t ready at that time to get pregnant’.
  (c) Concern about fertility
  ‘I realized that some have problems when they are 32 so I wanted to have a check of my chances and I was also a little bit nervous when you are there’.
  (d) Aid for decision-making
  ‘I was getting older and older . . .and I wanted to go and have it checked out to see can I stay with him and wait or should I just say you know what I have to
  leave you and have a child with a donor’.
6                                                                                                                                                                Koert et al.



    Table III Illustrative themes, subthemes and quotations: If and how their needs were met.

    Needs met
    (a) Increased knowledge
    ‘I found out if I was fertile and that was the goal. It did what it should for me’.
    (b) Sense of reassurance
    ‘I think it made me relax a bit. . . we will still [try to conceive] in another two years - it’s going to be OK’.
    (c) ‘Kick in the butt’ - Motivation to decide and act
    ‘For me it was good. You know to get that kick in the butt’.
    ‘It was really, really good that we answered the study because otherwise we would have just taken it slow and not worried about it and it probably wouldn’t
    have happened’. [had a child]




                                                                                                                                                                                Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
    Unmet needs
    (a) Wish for a concrete, simple answer
    ‘It’s difﬁcult because basically you want to know should you start having children now or can you wait. And I guess you can’t tell us that because no one knows’.
    ‘I understand why it’s just as part of the project it’s frustrating. I: What does the frustrating refer to? P: That I couldn’t have a yes no should I have children now
    or in the X amount of years’.
    (b) Sense of uncertainty - perceived conﬂicting information
    ‘I mean in one way it was very helpful but the results I received were also quite confusing because there was sort of a gap between the visual count of the eggs
    that I had in my ovaries and what the blood work told’.
    (c) Wish for more information and/or discussion of options
    ‘It would have been helpful to know you have a year. Do you want to get pregnant? If yes, ok you have these options, you can do this and this and maybe you
    can improve your fertility by doing this and at least OK if you want to get inseminated OK go this way and what could be done to become pregnant’.




    Table IV Illustrative themes, subthemes and quotations: Interpretations and understanding of information received.

    There’s no problem
    (a) Everything looks ‘ﬁne’
    ‘I had that test and nothing was wrong. And he said oh nothing is wrong’.
    (b) ‘Good’ results equal certainty of pregnancy in future
    ‘I just had an idea that I would get pregnant fast and because I think I just interpreted, the “everything is good” with these results especially for your age and for
    my mind it just meant “oh I have a ton of eggs I’ll just get pregnant”. And it’s not something that they said to me so it is not like I was misled it was just something
    in something I thought’.
    (c) Focus on conﬁrmatory information—it’s OK or safe to wait
    ‘Maybe I over-interpreted the results like I wanted to hear that I could wait so maybe I took it like for like a guarantee that sure you can wait but I do remember
    the doctor telling me that you have a couple of good years left’.
    (d) But don’t wait too long
    ‘Basically I was told that I was pretty fertile so that was great. But I shouldn’t wait too long’.
    There’s a problem
    (a) Need to act now or in near future
    ‘So they said within the year you need to get pregnant because your chances are very poor’.
    There could be a problem
    (a) No guarantees
    ‘I completely understood that it was not a guarantee but an estimate but even though it made me feel very happy and relaxed’.




                                                                    .. Seeking information and reassurance.
                                                                     ..
Reasons for attending                                                 .. Wish for information and knowledge. All women stated they attended
                                                                       .
Women’s perceptions of their reasons for attending the FAC clinic .. the FAC because they wanted new information including their chances
                                                                       .
were grouped under the theme: Seeking information and reassurance. .. of conceiving in the future, how many years of ‘good fertility’ they had
                                                                       .
Subthemes are presented under the theme. See Table II for themes .. left (including actual number of years or number of eggs remaining) or
                                                                       ..
and illustrative quotations.                                            . their overall fertility status.
Six-year follow-up of fertility assessment/counselling                                                                                                                       7


  Table V Illustrative themes, subthemes and quotations: Perceptions of the FAC clinic and fertility assessment and
  counselling.

  Need for caution when providing high stakes information
  (a) Must manage expectations of information provided
  ‘I think it’s very important to keep that it is a chance that it’s no guarantee. To make it very, very clear even for people who don’t understand anything at all if
  that’s all they get from that consultation it should be that this is not a guarantee’.
  (b) Risk of misinterpretation of information
  ‘I just think that maybe it should be stressed more when you have the counselling that even though your results look good or if they are good that it doesn’t
  necessarily mean that you will get easily pregnant, that you will have an easy time conceiving’.
  (c) Possibility of creating false security




                                                                                                                                                                                 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
  ‘I think it is more difﬁcult when you are told “this is good” because maybe it is almost like a false sense of security for a lot of, well for me and maybe for a lot of
  other people. I think it’s dangerous, you never know, I mean what difﬁculties you will have when you try and start to conceive’.
  (d) May cause distress
  ‘Well some people can get stressed about it [information provided] but . . .I think I would prefer to know what are the challenges instead of trying and trying
  and trying and trying and not understanding’.
  (e) Risk of information inﬂuencing behaviour
  ‘I think maybe it could potentially push you in a direction that you were not supposed to follow. Because you have this knowledge’.
  (f) Information provided may not be sufﬁcient
  ‘So I think it’s important to highlight . . . all the consequences of waiting. Not only reduced chance of getting pregnant and increased risk of diseases, Downs
  [syndrome] and stuff like that, but also the fact that the new technologies the chance of success are not that good and to highlight how many women who get
  pregnant with the eggs or insemination or intervention’.
  Beneﬁts of receiving information outweigh costs
  (a) Value of increased awareness and knowledge
  ‘Sometimes when truth is in your face it helps you act like it makes you act . . .the fact that she said. . . if you don’t act you might not have kids and of course I
  was grateful for that because that would have been for me devastating. So I was grateful’.
  ‘I think you can become a bitter person if you, it gives you more force, more power to actually make your own choices and to know that you did something.
  Maybe it won’t end up the way you thought but at least you did something’.
  (b) Facilitates informed decision-making
  ‘It will also help you to move on in the right direction instead of maybe struggling or hoping for years and putting your power into something that isn’t possible
  when you could take another decision you may take adoption or another type of life that would be right for that person’.
  (c) Builds sense of control and empowerment
  ‘I think for me it was a great thing and for most people it would be a great thing because it gives the more information about their own body that they don’t
  have. Nobody knows those kind of things so I think it’s a great thing’.
  ‘But I think it just gave a sense of control. . . it just gave us a few more years (laugh) to do fun stuff’.
  (d) Provides sense of reassurance regarding delay of pregnancy
  ‘But we were sort of, we were shown that yes everything is good and when you start it shouldn’t be a problem from both of you so for us we knew OK we can
  take a breather for a year or two’.
  (e) Use as a preventative tool
  ‘I said before it is especially good if it shows that maybe you’re nearing early menopause or whatever problems you could have, maybe you have a blocked ovary
  or something else you were unaware of then you have something you can say “OK I need to get this going, it can’t wait. I need to start now”’.
  ‘Just imagine if people went through and they could make a choice and didn’t have to experience going to the fertility clinic. It could save people from the
  disappointment basically’.



                                                                            ..
Confirmation and reassurance regarding delay and future pregnancy.           .. If and how their needs were met
Women described their desire for reassurance from a medical                   ..
                                                                               .. Women’s perceptions and experiences regarding if and how their
professional that they could safely wait to have a child until some point       ..
in the future and would be able to conceive when they tried. They                .. needs had been met were grouped under two themes: Needs met
                                                                                  .. and Unmet needs. Subthemes are included under each theme. See
wished for an answer that confirmed their current fertility decisions.             ..
                                                                                    . Table III for themes and illustrative quotations.
Concern about fertility. Women reported that their fertility was on their ...
mind before attending the FAC clinic. Women shared their experience ...
                                                                                    .
of distress, concern and anxiety about their fertility ‘running out’ and .. Needs met.
not being able to conceive in the future.
                                                                                    ..
                                                                                     .. Increased knowledge. Many women stated that they left the FAC clinic
                                                                                      .
Aid for decision-making. The women wished for information that could .. with the information that they were seeking that helped them feel
help them make decisions regarding their fertility.
                                                                                      .. equipped to make informed choices.
8                                                                                                                                                                           Koert et al.

                                                                            ..
Sense of reassurance. Women described the feeling of relief and reas-        ..                                But don’t wait too long. Women spoke of understanding that regardless
surance about being told they should not worry about their fertility          ..                               of their personal fertility potential, they should not ‘wait too long’ to
                                                                               ..
and had more time to wait to conceive.                                          ..                             have children.
                                                                                 .
‘Kick in the butt’—motivation to decide and act. Some women felt at- ...                                       There’s a problem.
tending the FAC clinic gave them a ‘kick in the butt’ to make decisions ..
                                                                                 .
                                                                                 .                             Need to act now or in near future. In a few cases, women understood
and take actions regarding their fertility and if they wanted to become ..                                     there was a problem with their fertility, or their advanced age may be
                                                                                 .
parents in the future (e.g. initiating a conversation about parenthood ..
                                                                                 .                             an issue. The women interpreted this to mean that they must ‘hurry
with their partner, starting to try to conceive, seeking fertility treat- ..
                                                                                 .                             up’ or ‘start now’ if they wanted to have a child because their fertility
ment, ending a relationship or becoming a sole support mother). In ...                                         might be compromised. Overall, women expressed their gratitude that
‘acting’ sooner, women believed that they had avoided potential infer- ...                                     the problem was identified and they avoided unintentional
tility or unintentional childlessness.
                                                                                 ..
                                                                                  ..                           childlessness.




                                                                                                                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
                                                                                   ..
Unmet needs.                                                                        ..                         There could be a problem.
                                                                                     .
Those women who perceived that their needs had not been met by ..                                              No guarantees. In a few cases, women understood that there could be
                                                                                     .
attending the FAC clinic also acknowledged that their expectations for ..                                      a problem with their fertility even if not identified in the tests, thus
                                                                                     ..
the intervention were ‘likely not realistic’.                                         ..                       there were ‘no guarantees’ they would become pregnant if they
                                                                                       .
Wish for a concrete, simple answer. A few participants stated that they ..                                     waited too long before trying to become pregnant.
                                                                                       .
did not receive a concrete answer regarding their fertility potential and ...
how many years they could wait to have a child.
                                                                                       ..                      Perceptions of the FAC clinic and fertility
                                                                                        ..
Sense of uncertainty—perceived conflicting information. Some women ...                                         assessment and counselling
perceived that the information provided was ambiguous or conflicting. ..
                                                                                         .
                                                                                                               Women’s perceptions were based on their personal experience of at-
For example, perceiving conflicting results from the clinical evaluation ..
                                                                                         .
                                                                                                               tending the FAC clinic and included their advice for those providing
                                                                                         ..
(AMH test and AFC) and the advice provided by the consultant.                             ..                   and accessing this type of intervention in the future. All participants
Wish for more information and/or discussion of options. Several women ..
                                                                                           .                   agreed that there is value in this service, but that it must be offered
                                                                                           .
wished for more time to discuss options and to receive additional in- ..                                       with caution because it provides ‘high stakes’ information that has sig-
                                                                                           .
formation and guidance in a subsequent meeting after the session (e.g. ..                                      nificant implications for people’s subsequent decisions. The women’s
                                                                                           .
what are your options if your fertility is declining, how do I know I am ...                                   responses were categorized into two themes: Need for caution when
still fertile after having my first child?).                                               ..                  providing high stakes information and Benefits of receiving information
                                                                                            ..                 outweigh costs. Subthemes are included under each theme. See
                                                                                             ..
                                                                                              ..               Table V for themes and illustrative quotations.
Interpretations and understanding of                                                           ..
information received                                                                            ..
                                                                                                 ..            Need for caution when providing high stakes information.
In general, women recalled receiving information related to their per- ..
                                                                                                  .            Must manage expectations of information provided. Women suggested
sonal fertility levels and general information about fertility. The wom- ..
                                                                                                  .            that before attending the FAC clinic individuals must: be clear on what
                                                                                                  .
en’s subjective understanding of the information they received was ..                                          they want out of the test and realistic about what the test can tell
                                                                                                  .
grouped into three themes: There’s no problem, There’s a problem ..                                            them; be open minded and prepared for any answer; consider options
                                                                                                  .
and There could be a problem. Subthemes are included under each ...                                            and actions based on potential answers; and be aware of the conse-
theme. See Table IV for themes and illustrative quotations.                                       ..           quences of receiving information and that decisions could be made
                                                                                                   ..          based on the information provided.
                                                                                                    ..
There’s no problem.                                                                                  ..        Risk of misinterpretation of information. Women stressed that the FAC
                                                                                                      .
Everything looks ‘fine’. The women remembered being told that ‘every- ..                                       clinic’s ‘message’ should include the qualification that the information
                                                                                                      .
thing looks fine’ or ‘normal’ regarding their fertility, which they inter- ..                                  provided does not guarantee a pregnancy in the future. They sug-
                                                                                                      ..
preted to mean there were no problems identified.                                                      ..      gested that to avoid ‘over-interpreting the results’ attendees should be
                                                                                                        .
‘Good’ results equal certainty of pregnancy in future. By extension, most ..                                   told that even if their fertility ‘looks good’ they ‘shouldn’t wait too
                                                                                                        .
of the women who recalled being told their fertility was ‘fine’ also ...                                       long’.
noted that they believed this result was confirmation of their concrete ...                                    Possibility of creating false security. Many of the women spoke generally
chances of becoming pregnant in the future. Some women shared ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                               about the possibility that those attending the FAC clinic may develop a
their awareness they had ‘over-interpreted’ the information provided ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                               false sense of security that their fertility is currently ‘good’ and they
                                                                                                        ..
to confirm certainty of pregnancy in the future, in hindsight.                                           ..    can delay parenthood indefinitely but be unable to achieve a pregnancy
Focus on confirmatory information—it’s OK or safe to wait. Women ..
                                                                                                          .    in the future after waiting too long. This was described as the worst-
                                                                                                          .
attended the FAC clinic seeking reassurance that they could wait to ..                                         case scenario rather than based on their personal experience.
                                                                                                          .
conceive and would be able to become pregnant in the future when ..                                            May cause distress. Like the previous concern about ‘False security’,
                                                                                                          .
they were ready. As such, they described a tendency to focus on the ...                                        some women highlighted their general concern about how others
FAC clinic information that confirmed this option and did not focus on ...                                     might react to ‘bad results’. They believed that the information may
other information provided (e.g. age and fertility decline).
                                                                                                          ..   come as a shock if it is not expected. That said, those women who
Six-year follow-up of fertility assessment/counselling                                                                                                                                  9

                                                                                ..
received what they perceived as ‘bad results’ spoke of being grateful            ..                           childbearing. Similar to Sylvest’s et al.’s (2018) 1-year follow-up study
that they knew there was a problem so that they could take action be-             ..                          of 20 women attending the FAC clinic, most of the women in the pre-
                                                                                   ..
fore time ran out.                                                                  ..                        sent 6-year follow-up study (no overlapping participants) believed their
                                                                                     .
Risk of information influencing behaviour. As with the previous sub- ..                                       needs had been met by attending the FAC clinic. Those who were dis-
                                                                                     .
themes, women stated a general concern that knowledge may ‘push’ ..                                           satisfied cited a desire for exact, concrete information as to their
                                                                                     .
people to act before thinking, such as rushing to become pregnant or ...                                      remaining years of fertility, although acknowledged that this was likely
to end a relationship with a partner who is not ready to become a ...                                         not realistic. In this study, women viewed personalized fertility knowl-
parent.                                                                              ..                       edge as an important aid to decision-making but cautioned about de-
                                                                                      ..                      veloping a false sense of security based on the results. Women stated
Information provided may not be sufficient. A few women mentioned ...                                         they felt reassured about their fertility status after attending the FAC
that more information is needed than is provided in the intervention in ...                                   clinic whilst understanding that they should not wait ‘too long’ before
order to make informed decisions about their fertility, including more ..
                                                                                       .
                                                                                                              trying to become pregnant. Despite different samples and follow-up




                                                                                                                                                                                             Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
comprehensive testing and opportunities for questions and additional ..
                                                                                       .
                                                                                       ..                     time points, the similarity between the Sylvest et al. (2018) study and
follow-up.                                                                              ..                    the present study findings emphasizes consistencies in women’s experi-
                                                                                         ..                   ences and supports the trustworthiness of both study’s findings on the
Benefits of receiving information outweigh costs.                                         ..
                                                                                           .                  benefits of attending the FAC clinic.
Value of increased awareness and knowledge. Despite highlighting the ..
                                                                                           .                     The women’s accounts highlight the value of the FAC clinic as a
cautions or concerns regarding this type of intervention, all of the par- ..
                                                                                           .                  screening tool and support the basic principle of screening—‘don’t
ticipants believed that the benefits of receiving information and being ...
                                                                                                              guess, assess’—that is, to provide personal health information to help
able to make informed decisions outweighed the potential costs. As ...
                                                                                                              individuals make informed decisions about their health. The FAC clinic
such, they believed that regardless of the result, knowledge is impor- ...
                                                                                           .                  intervention meets one of the World Health Organization’s (Wilson
tant as it increases awareness, provides new insights into personal and ..
general fertility and reduces uncertainty. Benefits were described on a ..
                                                                                           .                  and Jungner, 1968) general screening criteria, which includes the selec-

personal level (i.e. made them realize they had to start trying to con- ..
                                                                                           .                  tion of a condition that can be detected at an early stage (i.e. infertility
                                                                                           .                  or fertility problems) and the availability of acceptable treatment for
ceive very soon or risk infertility and childlessness) and the potential ..
                                                                                           ..                 the condition (i.e. fertility treatment) or the possibility of preventing
societal level (e.g. reducing the need for fertility treatment).                            ..                the condition (e.g. advanced decision to conceive thus preventing age-
                                                                                             .
Facilitates informed decision-making. The most significant and often cited ..                                 related infertility). When asked about their perception of the FAC
                                                                                             .
benefit of the FAC clinic was that it facilitates informed decision- ..                                       clinic and fertility assessment and counselling more broadly, women in
                                                                                             .
making. The women wanted to make conscious decisions based on in- ..                                          the study expressed some concerns or risks about providing this type
                                                                                             .
formation rather than deciding by default. They stressed that it was ..                                       of service (e.g. developing a false sense of security of one’s fertility and
                                                                                             .
easier to make decisions when they ‘know the facts’. Based on their ...                                       waiting ‘too long’), but all women acknowledged that the benefits of
experience, women argued that people should be provided with ...                                              receiving information and being able to make an informed decisions
‘straight answers’ about the reality of age and fertility decline regard- ...                                 outweighed any concerns. This was particularly the case of when a
less of their personal fertility levels, even if it causes initial distress.
                                                                                             ..               problem was identified, providing women with the opportunity to
                                                                                              ..
Builds sense of control and empowerment. The participants highlighted ...                                     make informed decisions and seek assistance to increase the likelihood
how attending the FAC clinic provided them with a sense of control ..
                                                                                               .              of becoming pregnant and having a family.
or empowerment to make informed decisions and actions. Many of ..
                                                                                               .                 The women’s accounts highlight their desire for an exact, concrete
the participants mentioned that they had recommended the FAC clinic ..
                                                                                               .              answer as to their fertility potential and their tendency to over-
to their friends, that they would encourage their children to attend as ..
                                                                                               .              interpret the information provided (i.e., ‘no problems’ identified) to in-
                                                                                               .              dicate the certainty of becoming pregnant in the future. This is consis-
young adults, and/or that everyone should have access to this service. ..
                                                                                               ..             tent with the findings of a systematic review of attitudes towards
Provides sense of reassurance regarding delay of pregnancy. The partici- ..                                   health-based screening that showed that people generally overestimate
                                                                                                .
pants spoke personally and more generally about the sense of reassur- ..
                                                                                                .             the benefits of health-based screening, underscoring their wish for con-
ance provided through this type of intervention that they had ‘more ..
                                                                                                .             crete answers regarding one’s body (Hoffman and Del Mar, 2015). In
time’ before trying to become pregnant. As such, the stress of the ..
                                                                                                ..            the current study, some of the women recognized their tendency to
‘ticking clock’ was reduced for a limited amount of time.                                        ..           over-interpret the information, however, others were unaware. The
                                                                                                  .
Use as a preventative tool. The women believed that, particularly in the ..                                   women’s tendency to focus on confirmatory information (i.e. that they
                                                                                                  .
case of an identified or possible problem with fertility, potential fertility ...                             could wait) highlights the need to provide accurate and balanced infor-
problems could be subverted by trying to become pregnant sooner or ...                                        mation about a screening intervention’s benefits, to contextualize and
seeking fertility treatment before it was too late. As such, it was ‘good ...                                 qualify the information provided including examples where ‘good
to know problems’ before it was too late to do anything about it.
                                                                                                  ..          news’ did not lead to a pregnancy (i.e. ‘no guarantee’ of future preg-
                                                                                                   ..
                                                                                                    ..        nancy), and to be cautious of language which could be over-
                                                                                                     ..       interpreted (Hoffman and Del Mar, 2015).
                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                       ..        This study highlights that fertility is indeed a highly emotional issue,
Discussion                                                                                              ..    with many women reporting that their fertility was on their minds be-
                                                                                                         ..
The most common reason that women attended the FAC clinic was ..                                              fore they attended the FAC clinic, often causing worry and distress.
to seek information and determine how long they could delay .
                                                                                                          .   Consistent with previous research on attitudes towards fertility
10                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Koert et al.

                                                                               ..
education (e.g. Boivin et al., 2018b), when speaking about fertility edu-       .. showing knowledge maintained at follow-up (e.g. Maeda et al., 2018)
cation more broadly the participants cautioned that receiving fertility-         .. and others showing it is not (e.g. Daniluk and Koert, 2015). In our
                                                                                  ..
related information may increase individuals’ distress. The few studies            .. study, 6 years after attending the FAC clinic, women were still able to
that have examined this specifically provide some preliminary support               ... recall very clearly the information received, most commonly the age
for an increase in subjective anxiety or worry after exposure to a fertil-            .. and fertility decline graph shown by the consultant. Taken together,
                                                                                       ..
ity education intervention without personalized information (e.g.                       .. these findings support the value of including interventions that are per-
Maeda et al., 2016; Boivin et al., 2018a,b). Boivin et al. (2018b) sug-                  .. sonalized, timely, and relevant to the individual’s stage of life and cur-
                                                                                          ..
gested distress may increase when fertility information feels threatening                  .. rent fertility decision-making as part of a two-pronged approach to
to other goals (e.g. career).                                                               .. fertility education and awareness.
                                                                                             ..
    In our study, whilst some women experienced dissatisfaction with                          .. Finally, the findings highlight that attending the FAC clinic might be
residual uncertainty because they wished for an exact or ‘concrete’ an-                        .. an important first step or action in women’s fertility decision-making
                                                                                                ..
swer regarding their fertility, ultimately all felt that the benefits of re-                     .. process and/or becoming ready for parenthood. The participants




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
ceiving personalized fertility information outweighed the risks. Most of
                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                   .. shared how the FAC clinic was a ‘kick in the butt’ and motivated
the women felt reassured given they had the information they needed                                 .. them to decide and act, similar to the women in Sylvest et al.’s (2018)
to make an informed decision about their fertility. That said, our par-
                                                                                                     ..
                                                                                                      .. 1-year follow-up study, suggesting that attending the FAC clinic acted
ticipants may be unique because they actively sought advice at the                                     .. as a cue to action as outlined in the Health Belief Model (Rosenstock,
FAC clinic—in many cases because they already felt worried or con-
                                                                                                        ..
                                                                                                         .. 1990; Glanz and Bishop, 2010) and provides support for the FAC clin-
cerned about their fertility—and they received reassurance, which itself                                  .. ic’s acceptability and usefulness as an intervention. Finally, it should be
felt empowering rather than distressing. For example, those who were
                                                                                                           ..
                                                                                                            .. stressed that the true effectiveness of the FAC clinic’s activity in terms
told they might have a problem with their fertility felt reassured that                                      .. of predicting long-term fertility remains to be investigated with follow-
                                                                                                              ..
they could now take action and avoid unintentional childlessness.                                              .. up studies on total delivery rates at the end of their reproductive age.
    It may be that in our study women’s distress and uncertainty was                                            ..
                                                                                                                 ..
reduced because they were provided with personalized fertility infor-                                             .. Limitations
mation in a highly supported environment. As such, these women did                                                 ..
                                                                                                                    .. The participants were volunteers from a sample of Danish women
not only receive fertility education, they were offered personalized,                                                ..
fertility assessment and guidance tailored to each individual, and sup-                                               .. who previously attended the FAC clinic in its first year of operation.
                                                                                                                       .. Whilst 141 women were invited to participate, 25% expressed inter-
ported in the information they received. There may also be some pos-                                                    ..
itive recall bias in those for whom the anticipated harm (i.e. not being                                                 .. est in participating. That said, in a qualitative study, diversity of opin-
                                                                                                                          .. ions is more important than representativeness. The study group
able to become pregnant) did not come to pass and a resolution of                                                          ..
decisional anxiety regarding fertility and competing life plans. In other                                                   .. included a broad spectrum of women with variability in experiences at
                                                                                                                             .. the FAC clinic (i.e. interpretation of information received) and fertility
studies testing fertility education interventions, participants could have                                                    ..
been taken by surprise if they did not actively seek out the fertility in-                                                     .. trajectories (e.g. parental status, number of children, sexual orienta-
                                                                                                                                ..
formation or they may not have been at the stage in their lives where                                                            .. tion, single/partnered parenthood). However, we do not know the
their fertility was relevant, and importantly the information was not
                                                                                                                                  .. experiences of those who did not participate. The current study group
                                                                                                                                   ..
personalized or provided in a highly supported environment as is the                                                                .. is on average older than the current average age at first child in
case in the FAC clinic (e.g. Maeda et al., 2016; Boivin et al., 2018a,b).
                                                                                                                                     .. Denmark (33.5 versus 29.3 years; Statistics Denmark, 2018). Thus,
                                                                                                                                      ..
    Our findings show those who expressed some distress were those                                                                     .. this group may be more ‘delayed’ or ambivalent and it cannot be said
who described uncertainty in their fertility potential due to perceived
                                                                                                                                        .. that this is the experience of all women of reproductive age.
                                                                                                                                         ..
conflicting results of clinical examination (e.g. AMH and AFC) or con-                                                                    .. However, this study provides the first long-term follow-up of women
flicting messages between tests and advice. Some of this uncertainty
                                                                                                                                           .. receiving personalized fertility assessment and guidance and points to
                                                                                                                                            ..
might have been a function of the FAC clinic procedure, as originally                                                                        .. its value as a fertility awareness intervention.
                                                                                                                                              ..
the AMH test results were provided 2 weeks after the visit by email.                                                                           ..
Currently, FAC clinic attendees have their blood taken and AMH                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                                                                 ..
tested before the clinic visit so that the results of all tests can be inte-                                                                      .. Conclusion
grated into the information and guidance provided in the in-person                                                                                 ..
                                                                                                                                                    .. This research suggests that the FAC clinic is a useful concept in in-
meeting, ensuring that attendees are not left confused or having to in-                                                                              ..
terpret results on their own. This may resolve some of the uncertainty                                                                                .. creasing women’s fertility awareness.
                                                                                                                                                       .. The participants viewed the personalized fertility knowledge and ad-
described by the participants. In addition, women highlighted their                                                                                     ..
wish for more time to discuss options and to receive additional infor-                                                                                   .. vice they received as important aids to their fertility decision-making
                                                                                                                                                          ..
mation and guidance after attending the FAC clinic. Additional support                                                                                     .. and they believed the benefits outweighed the risks of receiving per-
and follow-up may be a way to fulfil the unmet needs stated by the                                                                                          .. sonalized fertility information. As such, the findings provide support for
                                                                                                                                                             ..
participants and reduce any remaining uncertainty and distress.                                                                                               .. an individualized approach to fertility education, assessment and
    Previous research supports the increase in fertility knowledge after                                                                                       .. counselling, provided at a time when it is relevant to the individual’s
                                                                                                                                                                ..
exposure to fertility education interventions (e.g. Williamson et al.,                                                                                           .. current fertility decision-making (i.e. eager for specific information,
2014; Garcia et al., 2016; Maeda et al., 2016; Conceiç~ao et al., 2017;
                                                                                                                                                                  .. sought it out themselves) and supports previous calls for customized,
                                                                                                                                                                   ..
Hammarberg et al., 2017; Boivin et al., 2018a). There are mixed find-                                                                                               .. tailored fertility education interventions (e.g. Daniluk and Koert, 2015;
ings in the few studies measuring long-term retention with some
                                                                                                                                                                     .. Garcia et al., 2016; Boivin et al., 2018a,b; Pedro et al., 2018). The
Six-year follow-up of fertility assessment/counselling                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                          ..
women’s accounts underscore the value in the principle ‘don’t guess,       ..                                           Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res
                                                                            ..                                            Psych 2006;3:77–101.
assess’ and provide support for the FAC clinic’s usefulness as a screen-     ..
ing tool and promoting informed fertility decision-making. This research      ..                                        Braun V, Clarke V. (Mis)conceptualizing themes, thematic analysis,
                                                                               ..                                         and other problems with Fugard and Potts’ (2015) sample-size
supports a two-pronged approach to fertility education and awareness,           ..
with the inclusion and development of fertility interventions providing          ..                                       tool for thematic analysis. Int J Soc Res 2016;19:739–743.
                                                                                  ..                                    Bunting L, Boivin J. Development and preliminary validation of the
personalized fertility information on an individual or couple level, along         ..
with broad fertility education strategies (e.g. video, brochure, website)
                                                                                    ..                                    fertility status awareness tool: FertiSTAT. Hum Reprod 2010;25:
                                                                                     ..                                   1722–1733.
providing general fertility information to a wider population.                        ..
                                                                                       ..                               Conceiç~ao C, Pedro J, Martins MV. Effectiveness of a video interven-
                                                                                        ..                                tion on fertility knowledge among university students: a rando-
                                                                                         ..
Authors’ roles                                                                            ..                              mised pre-test/post-test study. Euro J Contracept Reprod Health
                                                                                           ..
All co-authors contributed to the concept and design of the study and ..                                                  Care 2017;22:107–113.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
analysis/interpretation of the data, and critically revised and provided ..
                                                                                            .                           Daniluk J, Koert E. Fertility awareness online: the efficacy of a fertility
final approval of the manuscript. E.K. conducted the interviews and ..
                                                                                            .                             education website in increasing knowledge and changing fertility
                                                                                            .
drafted first draft of the manuscript and integrated the co-authors’ ..                                                   beliefs. Hum Reprod 2015;30:353–363.
                                                                                            ..                          Garcia D, Vassena R, Prat A, Vernaeve V. Increasing fertility knowl-
feedback into the final version.                                                             ..
                                                                                              ..                          edge and awareness by tailored education: a randomized con-
                                                                                               ..                         trolled trial. Reprod Biomed Online 2016;32:113–120.
Funding                                                                                         ..
                                                                                                 ..                     Glanz K, Bishop DB. The role of behavioral science theory in devel-
E.K. was funded by an ESHRE Travel/Training grant by ReproUnion, ..
                                                                                                  .                       opment and implementation of public health interventions. Ann Rev
co-financed by the European Union, Interreg V OKS between ..
                                                                                                  .                       Public Health 2010;31:399–418.
October 2017 and March 2018.                                                                      ..                    Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough? An
                                                                                                   ..
                                                                                                    ..                    experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods
                                                                                                     ..
Conflict of interest                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                                                          2006;18:59–82.
                                                                                                                        Habbema JDF, Eijkemans MJ, Leridon H, te Velde ER. Realizing a de-
J.B. reports that the risk evaluation form used at the Fertility ...                                                      sired family size: when should couples start? Hum Reprod 2015;30:
Assessment Clinic was inspired by the Fertility Status Awareness Tool ...                                                 2215–2221.
FertiSTAT that was developed at Cardiff University for self-assessment ...                                              Hammarberg K, Norman RJ, Robertson S, McLaughlan R,
of reproductive risk (Bunting and Boivin, 2010). J.B. also reports per- ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                          Michelmore J, Johnson L. Development of a health promotion pro-
sonal fees from Merck KGaA, Merck AB, Theramex, Ferring ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                          gramme to improve awareness of factors that affect fertility, and
Pharmaceuticals A/S and a research grant from Merck Serono Ltd ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                          evaluation of its reach in the first 5 years. Reprod Biomed Soc Online
outside the submitted work. A.N.A. has received personal fees from ..
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                          2017;4:33–40.
                                                                                                        .
both Merck Pharmaceuticals and Ferring and grants from Roche ..                                                         Hoffman TC, Del Mar C. Patients’ expecations of the benefits and
                                                                                                        .
Diagnostics outside the submitted work. The other authors report no ..                                                    harms of treatments, screening, and tests. JAMA Intern Med 2015;
                                                                                                        ..
conflicts of interest.                                                                                   ..               175:274–286.
                                                                                                          ..            Hvidman HW, Petersen KB, Larsen EC, Macklon KT, Pinborg A,
                                                                                                           ..
References                                                                                                  ..            Andersen A. Individual fertility assessment and pro-fertility
                                                                                                             ..           counselling; should this be offered to women and men of repro-
                                                                                                              .
Birch Petersen K, Hvidman HW, Sylvest R, Pinborg A, Larsen EC, ..                                                         ductive age? Hum Reprod 2015;30:9–15.
                                                                                                              .
   Macklon KT, Andersen AN, Schmidt L. Family intentions and per- ..                                                    Leridon H, Slama R. The impact of a decline in fecundity and of preg-
                                                                                                              .
   sonal considerations on postponing childbearing in childless cohab- ...                                                nancy postponement on final number of children and demand for
   iting and single women aged 35-43 seeking fertility assessment and ...                                                 assisted reproduction technology. Hum Reprod 2008;23:
   counselling. Hum Reprod 2015;30:2563–2574.                                                                 ..          1312–1319.
                                                                                                               .
Birch Petersen K, Sylvest R, Nyboe Andersen A, Pinborg A, ...                                                           Maeda E, Boivin J, Toyokawa S, Murata K, Saito H. Two-year follow-
   Hvidman HW, Schmidt L. Attitudes towards family formation in ..
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                          up of a randomized controlled trial: knowledge and reproductive
   cohabiting and single childless women in their mid- to late thirties. ..
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                          outcome after online fertility education. Hum Reprod 2018;33:
   Hum Fertil 2016;19:48–55.
                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                ..        2035–2042.
Boivin J, Koert E, Harris T, O’Shea L, Perryman A, Parker K, ..                                                         Maeda E, Nakamura F, Kobayashi Y, Boivin J, Sugimori H, Muratta K,
                                                                                                                 .
   Harrison C. An experimental evaluation of the benefits and costs ..                                                    Saito H. Effects of fertility education on knowledge, desires and
                                                                                                                 .
   of providing fertility information to adolescents and emerging ..                                                      anxiety among the reproductive-aged population: findings from a
                                                                                                                 ..
   adults. Hum Reprod 2018a;33:1247–1253.                                                                         ..      randomized controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2016;31:2051–2060.
Boivin J, Sandhu A, Brian K, Harrison C. Fertility related knowledge ..                                                 Malterud K, Siersma VD, Guassora AD. Sample size in qualitative in-
                                                                                                                   .
   and perceptions of fertility education among adolescents and ...                                                       terview studies: guided by information power. Qual Health Res
   emerging adults: a qualitative study. Hum Fertil 2018b;22:291–299. ...                                                 2016;26:1753–1760.
Bowen DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, Cofta-Woerpel L, Linnan L, Weiner ...                                                    Mills M, Rindfuss RR, McDonald P, te Velde E. Why do people post-
   D, Bakken S, Patrick Kaplan C, Squiers L, Fabrizio C et al. How we ..
                                                                                                                   .      pone parenthood? Reasons and social policy incentives. Hum
   design feasibility studies. Am J Prev Med 2009;36:452–457.
                                                                                                                   ..     Reprod Update 2011;17:848–860.
12                                                                                                                                                                       Koert et al.


Morse JM. Determining sample size. Qual Health Res 2000;10:3–5.                  ..                           Statistics Denmark. Befolkningens udvikling. 2018. https://www.dst.
                                                                                  ..
Patton MQ. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. Integrating Theory         ..                           dk/da/Statistik/Publikationer/VisPub?cid¼29443 (19 February
  and Practice, 4th edn. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications, 2014.
                                                                                    ..                          2020, date last accessed).
                                                                                     ..
Pedro J, Brandao T, Schmidt L, Costa ME, Martins MV. What do                          ..                      Stern J, Larsson M, Kristiansson P, Tyden T. Introducing reproductive
  people know about fertility? A systematic review on fertility aware-
                                                                                       ..                       life plan-based information in contraceptive counselling: an RCT.
                                                                                        ..
  ness and its associated factors. Ups J Med Sci 2018;123:71–81.                         ..                     Hum Reprod 2013;28:2450–2461.
Rosenstock IM. The health belief model: explaining health behavior
                                                                                          ..                  Sylvest R, Koert E, Vittrup I, Birch Petersen K, Nyboe Andersen A,
                                                                                           ..
  through expectancies. In: K Glanz, FM Lewis, BK Rimers (eds).                             ..                  Pinborg A, Schmidt L. Status one year after fertility assessment and
                                                                                             ..
  Health Behavior and Health Education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-                            ..                counselling in women of reproductive age—a qualitatative study.
  Bass, 1990, 39–62.                                                                           ..               Ups J Med Sci 2018;123:264–270.
                                                                                                ..
Saunders B, Jim J, Kingstone T, Baker S, Waterfield J, Bartlam B, Burroughs                      ..           Williamson LE, Lawson KL, Downe PJ, Pierson RA. Informed repro-
  H, Jinks C. Saturation in qualitative research: exploring its conceptualiza-                    ..            ductive decision-making: the impact of providing fertility informa-




                                                                                                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/hropen/article/2020/4/hoaa036/5917886 by guest on 04 January 2021
                                                                                                   ..
  tion and operationalization. Qual Quant 2018;52:1893–1907.                                        ..          tion on fertility knowledge and intentions to delay childbearing. Int
Schmidt L, Sobotka T, Bentzen JG, Nyboe Andersen A; ESHRE                                            ..         J Gynecol Obstet Canada 2014;36:400–405.
                                                                                                      ..
  Reproduction and Society Task Force. Demographic and medical                                         ..     Wilson JMG, Jungner G. Principles and Practice of Screening for
  consequences of the postponement of parenthood. Hum Reprod                                            ..      Disease. 1968. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/37650
                                                                                                         ..
  Update 2012;18:29–43.                                                                                   .     (19 February 2020, date last accessed).
